
                             THE PRODIGALS

                MORRISON AND GIBB, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.




                             THE PRODIGALS

                        _AND THEIR INHERITANCE_


                                  BY

                             MRS. OLIPHANT

                               AUTHOR OF
            “CHRONICLES OF CARLINGFORD” “THE WIZARD’S SON”
                               ETC. ETC.


                            IN TWO VOLUMES

                                VOL. II


                             Methuen & Co.
                     36 ESSEX STREET, LONDON, W.C.
                                 1894




CHAPTER XI


Edward came out to meet her, and took her hand and drew it through his
arm. He led her in tenderly, holding that hand in his, without a vestige
of the reserve and restraint in which they had been living of late.
Winifred was greatly surprised. She drew away her hand, half-angry,
half-astonished. “Why is this?” she said. “Is it because it is so early
that you forget”--

“It is because there is no longer any need of precaution,” he said very
gravely, pressing her arm close to his side.

She gazed at him with an incapacity to understand, which would have
been incredible did it not happen so often at the great crises of life.
“I don’t know what you mean; nothing is changed,” she said. “But you
have not come to talk of you and me. Edward, how is my father?” She
asked the question with scarcely a fear. Then suddenly looked in his
face, flung his support from her, and flew upstairs without a word.

The door of her father’s room was closed; she rushed at it breathless.
It was half-opened after a little interval by old Hopkins, who barred
the entrance.

“You can’t come in yet, Miss Winifred, not yet,” he said, shaking his
head. Hopkins was full of the solemn importance and excitement of one
who has suddenly become an actor in a great event. He closed the door
upon her as he spoke, and there she stood, gazing at it blankly, her
brain swimming, her heart beating. That door had closed not only upon
her father dead, but upon a completed chapter of her own life.

Edward had hurried upstairs after her, and was now close by to console
her. But she would not give him her hand, which he sought. She walked
before him to the door of her own sitting-room, which stood wide open,
with an early glow of the newly-risen sun showing from the open windows.
Then she sat down and motioned him to a chair, but not beside her. A
more woeful countenance never lamented the most beloved of fathers. Her
dark outer garment was wet with dew, and clung closely about her; her
hair had a few drops of the same dew glimmering upon it; her face was
entirely destitute of colour.

“Tell me how it was,” she said.

“It was as I told you it would be. We must be thankful that no act of
ours, no contention of ours, quickened the catastrophe. He was in
perfectly good spirits last night, I hear. By the time I arrived, all
was over. Winifred”--

“Oh, do not touch me!” she said. “We deceived him, we lied to him! if
not in words, yet in deeds. And now you are glad that he is dead.”

“Not glad,” said the young man.

“Not glad! and I?” she cried, with an exclamation of despair.

“Winnie, do not make yourself more miserable than you need be; you are
not glad. And you will reproach yourself and be wretched for many a day,
without reason. I declare before Heaven without reason, Winnie! All that
you have done has been for his sake. And there is nothing for which you
can justly blame yourself. All that has been done has been sacrifice on
your part.” He came to her side and put his arm round her to console
her. But his touch was more than she could bear. She put out her hand
and put his away. He looked at her for a moment without saying anything,
and then asked, with a little bitterness, “Do you mean to cast me off
then, Winnie, because I denied myself for his sake?”

“Oh, Edward!” she said, giving him her hand; “don’t say a word of you
and me. I cannot tell you what I mean, or what I feel, not now. To be as
strangers while he lived, and the moment--the very moment he is gone”--

She rose up and began to walk about the room in a feverish misery which
was more like personal despair than the grief of a child for a father;
angry, miserable even because of the very sense of deliverance which
mingled with the anguish. The painful interview was broken by the rush
into the room of Miss Farrell, her white locks all disordered about her
pretty old head, stumbling over her long dressing-gown, and throwing
herself with tears and caresses upon Winifred’s shoulder.

“Oh, my darling, your dear father! Oh, my child, come to me and let me
comfort you!” she said.

Edward Langton withdrew without a word. There were a thousand ways in
which he could serve Winifred without insisting upon the office of
consoler, which indeed he gave up with a pang, yet heroically. A man,
when he makes a sacrifice, perhaps does it more entirely, more silently
than a woman. He made no stand for his rights, but gave up without a
word, and went forth to the external matters which there was no one but
he to manage. Mr. Chester had died as his young physician had known he
would do. He had forgotten the rules of life which had been prescribed
to him in his triumph and satisfaction on the previous night. He had
said to himself, “Soul, take thine ease,” and the catastrophe had been
as prompt as that of the parable. The alarmed and startled household was
all up and about by this time, the maids huddled in a corner discussing
the dreadful event, and comparing notes, now all was over, as to their
respective apprehensions and judgment of master’s looks. The men
wandered about, sometimes paying a fitful attention to their ordinary
work, but most frequently going up and downstairs to see if Mr. Hopkins
wanted anything, or if something new to report could be gleaned
anywhere. Dr. Langton took command of the household with instant
authority, awakening at once a new interest in the bosoms of the little
eager crowd. He was the new master, they all felt, some with a desire to
oppose, and some to conciliate. He sent off telegrams with a sort of
savage pleasure to the Dowager Countess and the other expected guests,
and he summoned Mr. Babington, who was the official authority, under
whose directions all immediate steps had to be taken. But Langton had no
idea of abnegation in respect to his own rights, any more than he had
any sense of guilt in respect to the dead man, out of consideration for
whom he had temporarily ignored them. He had made a great sacrifice to
preserve Mr. Chester’s health and life, but now that this life was over,
without any blame to any one, he did not deny that the relief was great.
Alas! even to Winifred, whose sensations of self-reproach were so
poignant, the smart was intensified while it was relieved, by a sense of
deliverance too.

When she came a little to herself, she insisted that her brothers should
be telegraphed for instantly. This was before Mr. Babington’s arrival,
and it is possible that Edward would have objected had he been able to
do so. He was not entirely above consideration of his own interests, and
he had believed that Mr. Chester from his point of view had not behaved
unwisely, nor even perhaps unkindly, in sending his sons away. That
Winifred should relinquish all the advantages which her father’s will
had secured cost him perhaps a pang. It would not have been unpleasant
to Edward Langton to find himself master of Bedloe. He knew he would
have filled the post better than either of the two thoughtless and
unintelligent young men whom their father himself had sent off, and who
probably would have sold it before the year was out. For his own part,
he should have liked to compromise, to give to each of them a sufficient
compensation and keep the estate, and replace in Bedloe the old name
that had been associated with it so long. That he should have had this
dazzling possibility before him, and yet have obeyed her wishes and sent
off these telegrams, said much for Edward’s self-denial. He knew that
Mr. Babington when he came would probably have objected strongly to such
a proceeding, and with reason. The doctor saw all the danger of it as he
rode into the little town to carry out Winifred’s instructions. The two
brothers would hurry home, each with the conviction that he was the
heir, and rage and disappointment would follow. Nevertheless, it seemed
to him that the very objections that rose in his own mind pledged him
all the more to carry out Winifred’s wishes. He was not disinterested as
she was. He did not feel any tie of affection to her brothers. He
thought them much more supportable at the other side of the world than
he had ever found them near. And there were few things he would not
have done, in honour, to secure Bedloe. All these arguments, however,
made it more necessary that he should do without hesitation or delay
what she wished. This was his part in the meantime, whether he entirely
approved or not. Afterwards, when they were man and wife, he might have
a more authoritative word to say. He telegraphed not only to George and
Tom, but through the banker, that money should be provided for their
return; and having done so, went back again with a mind full of anxiety,
the sense of deliverance of which his heart had been full clouding over
with this sudden return of the complications and embarrassments of life.

Mr. Babington did not arrive till next day. And he looked very grave
when he heard what had been done.

“Of what use is it?” he said; “the poor young fellows will find
themselves out of it altogether. They will come thinking that the
inheritance is theirs, and there is not a penny for them. Why did not
you wait till I came?”

“I should have preferred to do so,” said Langton; “but at such a moment
Miss Chester’s wish was above all.”

“Miss Chester’s wish?” said the lawyer, with a doubtful glance. “Perhaps
you think Miss Chester can do what she pleases? Poor thing, it is very
natural she should wish to do something for her brothers. But what if
she were making a mistake?”

“If you mean that after all the money is not to be hers”--said Langton,
with a slight change of colour.

“Before we go farther I ought to know--perhaps her father’s death has
brought about some change--between her and you?”

“No change at all. We were pledged to each other two years ago without
any opposition from him. I cannot say that he ever gave his formal
consent.”

“But it was all broken off--I heard as much from him--by mutual
consent.”

“It was never broken off. I saw what was coming, and I remained
perfectly quiet on the subject, and advised Miss Chester to do the
same.”

“Ah! and he was taken in!” the lawyer said.

This brought the colour to Langton’s face.

“I am not aware that there was any taking in in the case. I knew that
agitation was dangerous for him. It was better for us to wait, at our
age, than to have the self-reproach afterwards.” This was all true, yet
it was embarrassing to say.

“I see,” said Mr. Babington; “a waiting game doesn’t always recommend
itself to the lookers-on, Dr. Langton. It might have lasted for years.”

“I did not think,” said Langton hastily, “that it could have lasted for
weeks. He has lived longer than I expected.”

“And you were there at one side of him, and his daughter at the other,
waiting. I think I’d rather not have my daughter engaged to a doctor,
meaning no disrespect to you.”

“It sounds like something more than disrespect,” said Langton, with
offence. “If you think I did not do my duty by my patient”--

“Oh no, I don’t think that; but I think you will be disappointed, Dr.
Langton. I don’t quite see why you have sent for the boys. If the one
was for your interest, the other was dead against it. It is a
disagreeable business altogether. If they were to set up a plea against
you of undue influence”--

“I think,” said Langton, “that this is not a subject to be discussed
between us. You know very well that my influence with Mr. Chester was”--

“About the same as every other man’s, and that was nothing at all,” said
the lawyer, with a laugh. It is unseemly to laugh in a house all draped
and shrouded in mourning, and the sound seemed to produce a little stir
of horror in the silent place, all the more that Winifred came in at the
moment, as white as a spectre, in her black dress. Her look of
astonished reproach made the lawyer in his turn change countenance.

“I beg your pardon, Miss Winifred, I beg you a thousand pardons. It was
not any jest, I assure you, it was in very sober earnest. My dear young
lady, I need not say how shocked I was and distressed”--

The sudden change of aspect, the gloom which came over Mr. Babington’s
cheerful countenance, would have been more comical than melancholy to
an unconcerned spectator; but Winifred accepted it without criticism.
She said, “Did you know how ill he was?” with tears in her eyes.

“I--well, I cannot say that I thought he was strong; but a stroke like
this is always unexpected. In the midst of life”--said Mr. Babington
solemnly. But here he caught Langton’s eye and was silenced. “I hear you
have sent for your brothers.”

“Oh, at once! What could I do else? I am sure _now_ that he would have
wished me to do it.”

Mr. Babington shook his head. “I don’t think he would have wished it,
Miss Winifred. I don’t think they would care to come if they knew the
property is all left away from them.”

“He said it was left to me. But what could that be for? only to be given
back to them,” said Winifred, with a faint smile. “My father knew very
well what I should do. He will know now, and I know that he will
approve,” she said, with that exaltation which the wearied body and
excited soul attain to by times, a kind of ecstasy. “Even,” she cried,
“if he did not see what was best in this life, he will see it _now_.”

Mr. Babington looked on with a blank countenance. He did not realise
easily this instant conversion of the man he knew so well to higher
views. He could not indeed conceive of Mr. Chester at all except in the
most ordinary human conditions; but he knew that it was right to speak
and think in an exalted manner of those whom death had removed.

“We will hope so,” he said; “but in the meantime, my dear young lady,
you will find he has made it very difficult for you, as he had not then
attained to these enlightened views. Couldn’t you send another
telegram? They’re expensive, but in the circumstances”--

“We have made up our minds,” said Winifred, with a certain solemnity;
“do you know what we had to do, Mr. Babington? We had to deceive him, to
pretend that I would do as he wished. Oh, Edward, I cannot bear to think
of it. I never said it in so many words. I did not exactly tell a lie,
but I let him suppose--I wonder--do you think he hears what I say?
surely he knows;” and here, worn out as she was, the tears which had
been so near her eyes burst forth.

Langton brought her a chair, and made her sit down and soothed her; but
his face was blank like that of the lawyer, who was altogether taken
aback by this sudden spiritualising of his old friend.

“I daresay it will all come right,” Mr. Babington said.




CHAPTER XII


Mr. Babington remained in the house, or at least returned to it
constantly, passing most of his time there till the funeral was over;
after which he read the will to the little company, consisting only of
Winifred, Edward, and Miss Farrell, who remained in the house. It was a
will which excited much agitation and distress, and awoke very different
sentiments in the minds of the two who were chiefly concerned. Winifred
received its stipulations like so many blows, while in the mind of her
lover they raised a sort of involuntary elation, an ambition and
eagerness of which he had not been hitherto sensible. The condition
under which Winifred inherited her father’s fortune was, that she was
not to divide or share it with her brothers; that Mr. Chester had meant
to add many other bonds and directions which would have left her without
any freedom of individual action at all, mattered little; but this one
stipulation had been appended at once to the will, and was not to be
avoided or ignored. In case she attempted to divide or share her
inheritance, or alienate any part of it, she was to forfeit the whole.
No latitude was allowed to her, no power of compromise. This information
crushed Winifred’s courage and spirits altogether. It made the gloom of
the moment tenfold darker, and subdued in her the rising tide of life.
That tide had begun to rise involuntarily even in the first week, while
the windows were still shrouded and the house full of crape and
darkness. She had shed those few natural tears, which are all that in
many cases the best parents have to look for, and, though moved by
times with a compunction equally natural, was yet prepared to dry them
and go on to the sunshine that awaited her, and the setting of all
things right which had seemed to her the chief object in life. But when
she saw this great barrier standing up before her, and knew that her
brothers were both on their way, hoping great things, to be met on their
arrival only by this impossibility, her heart failed her altogether. She
had no courage to meet the situation. She felt ill, worn out by the
agitations of the previous period and the blank despair of this, and for
a time turned away from the light, and would not be comforted.

Upon Edward Langton a very different effect was produced; while
Winifred’s heart sank in her bosom, his rose with a boundless
exhilaration and hope. What he saw before him was something so entirely
unhoped for, so unthought of, that it was no wonder if it turned his
head, as the vulgar say. Mr. Chester, who had acquired the property of
his ancestors in their moment of need, unrighteously as he believed,
trading upon their necessities, seemed to him now, with all the force of
a dead hand, to thrust compensation upon him. It was not to Winifred but
to him that the fortune seemed to be given. That this was the reverse of
the testator’s intention, that he had meant something totally different,
did not affect Langton’s mind. It gave him even an additional grim
satisfaction, as the jewels of gold and of silver borrowed from his
Egyptian master might have satisfied the mind of a fierce Hebrew,
defrauded for a lifetime of the recompense of his toil. The
millionaire’s plunder, his gain which had been extracted from the sweat
of other men, was to return into the hands of one of the families at
least of which he had taken advantage. For once the revenges of time
were fully just and satisfactory. He went about his parish work and
visited his poor patients with this elation in his mind, instinctively
making notes as to things which he would have done and improvements
made. Mr. Chester, who had the practical instincts of a man whose first
thought has always been to make money, had, indeed, done a great deal
for the estate; but he had spent nothing, neither thought nor money,
upon the condition of the poor, for whom he cared much less than for
their cattle. Langton’s interests were strong in the other way. He
thought of sanitary miracles to be performed, of disease to be
extirpated, of wholesome houses and wholesome faces in the little
clusters of human habitation that were dotted here and there round the
enclosure of the park. Different minds take their pleasures in different
ways. He was not dull to the delights of a well-preserved cover; but
with a more lively impulse he anticipated a grand battue of smells and
miasmas, draining of stagnant ponds, and destruction to the agues and
fevers which haunted the surrounding country. This idea blended with the
intense subdued pleasure of anticipation with which he thought of the
estate returning to the old name, and himself to the house of his
fathers: there was nothing ignoble in the elation that filled his mind.
Perhaps, according to the sentiment of romance, it would have been a
more lofty position had he endured tortures from the idea of owing this
elevation to his marriage; or even had he refused, at the cost of her
happiness and his own, to accept so much from his wife; but Langton was
of a robust kind, and not easily affected by those prejudices, which
after all are not very respectful to women. He would have married
Winifred with nothing. Why should he withdraw from her when she had
much? So far as this went, he accepted the good fortune which she
seemed about to bring him without a question, with a satisfaction which
filled his whole being. Bedloe had not been the better of the Chesters
hitherto, but it should be the better for him.

And if there came over him a little chill occasionally when he thought
of the two helpless prodigals whom he despised, coming over the sea,
each from his different quarter, full of hopes which were never to be
realised, Langton found it possible to push them aside out of his mind,
as it is always possible to put aside an unpleasant subject. Sometimes
there would come over him a chill less momentary when the thought that
Winifred might hold by her decision on this subject crossed his mind.
But she was very gentle, very easily influenced, not the sort of woman
to assert herself. She had yielded to him in respect to her father,
even when the course of conduct he recommended had been odious to her.
That she should have felt so strongly on the subject had seemed somewhat
ridiculous to him at the time, but, notwithstanding, she had yielded to
his better judgment and had followed the directions he had given her.
And there did not seem any reason to believe that she would not do the
same again. She was of a very tender nature, poor Winnie! She could not
bear to hurt any one. It was not to be expected, probably it was not
even to be desired, that the real advantages of this arrangement should
strike her as they did himself. She had a natural clinging to her
brothers. She declined to see them in their true light. It was terrible
to her to profit by their ruin. But Langton, though acknowledging all
this, could not conceive the possibility that Winnie would actually
resist his guidance, and follow her own conclusions. She could not do
it. She would do as he indicated, though it might cost her some tears,
and perhaps a struggle with herself, tears which Langton was fully in
the mind to repay by such love and care when she was his wife as would
banish henceforward all other tears from her eyes. Like so many other
clever persons, he shut his own in the meantime. He was aware that the
position in which she was placed, the thought of the future, lay at the
bottom of her illness, and even that until the constant irritation thus
caused was withdrawn or neutralised, her mind would not recover its
tone. At least he would have been fully aware of this had his patient
been any other than Winifred. She was suffering, no doubt, he allowed,
but by and by she would get over it, the disturbing influence would work
itself out, and all would be well.

And in the meantime there were moments of sweetness for both in the
interval that followed. As Winifred recovered slowly, the subduing
influence of bodily weakness hushed her cares. For the moment she could
do nothing, and, anxious as she was, it was so soothing to have the
company, and sympathy, and care of her lover, that she too pushed aside
all disturbing influences, and almost succeeded while he was with her in
forgetting. Instinctively she was aware that on this point his mind and
hers would not be in accord--on every other point they were one, and she
listened to the suggestions he made as to improvements and alterations
with that sensation of pleasure ineffable which arises in a woman’s mind
when the man whom she loves shows himself at his best. He had too much
discretion and good feeling to do more than suggest these beneficial
changes, and above all he never betrayed the elation in his own views
and intention in his own mind to carry them out himself. But from her
sofa, or from the terrace, where presently she was able to walk with the
support of his arm, Winifred listened to his description of all that
could be done, and looked at the little sketches he would make of
improved houses, and new ways of effectual succour to the poor, with a
pleasure which was more near what we may suppose to be angelic
satisfaction than any other on earth. When he went away, a cloud would
come over the landscape. She would say to herself that George would be
little likely to carry out these plans, and again with a keener pang
would be conscious that Edward was as yet unconvinced of her
determination on the subject. But when he came back to her, all that
could possibly come between them was by common instinctive accord put
away, and there was a happiness in those days of waiting almost like the
pathetic happiness which softens the ebbing out of life. Miss Farrell,
who was more than ever like a mother to the poor girl who had so much
need of her, looked forward, as a mother so often does, with almost as
much happiness as the chief actors in that lovers’ meeting to Edward’s
coming. Every evening, when his work was over, the two ladies would
listen for his quick step, or the sound of his horse’s hoofs over the
fallen leaves in the avenue. He came in, bringing the fresh air with
him, and the movement and stir of life, with such news as was to be had
in that rural quiet, with stories of his humble patients, and all the
humours of the countryside. It was something to expect all day long and
make the slow hours go by as on noiseless wings. There is perhaps
nothing which makes life so sweet. This is half the charm of marriage to
women; and before marriage there is a delicacy, a possibility of
interruption, a voluntary and spontaneous character in the intercourse
which makes it even more delightful. In the moonlight evenings, when the
yellow harvest moon was resplendent over all the country, and Winifred
was well enough for the exertion, the two would stray out together,
leaving the gentle old spectator of their happiness almost more happy
than they, in the tranquillity of her age, to prepare the tea for them,
or with Hopkins’s assistance (given with a little contemptuous
toleration of her interference) the “cup” which Langton had the bad
taste to prefer to tea.

This lasted for several weeks, even months, and it was not till October,
when the woods were all russet and yellow, and a little chill had come
into the air, that the tranquillity was disturbed by a telegram which
announced the arrival of Tom. It was dated from Plymouth, and even in
the concise style demanded by the telegraph there was a ring of
satisfaction and triumph to Winifred’s sensitive ear. She trembled as
she read--“Shall lose no time expect me by earliest train to-morrow.”
This intimation came tingling like a shot into the calm atmosphere,
sending vibrations everywhere. In the first moment it fell like a
death-blow on Winifred, severing her life in two, cutting her off from
all the past, even, it was possible, from Edward and his love. When he
came in the evening she said nothing until they were alone upon the
terrace in the moonlight, taking the little stroll which had become so
delightful to her. It was the last time, perhaps, that, free from all
interruption, they would spend the tranquil evening so. She walked about
for some time leaning upon him, letting him talk to her, answering
little or nothing. Then suddenly, in the midst of something he was
saying, without sequence or reason, she said suddenly, “Edward, I have
had a telegram from Tom.”

He started and stopped short with a quick exclamation--“From Tom!”

“He is coming to-morrow,” Winifred said; and then there fell a silence
over them, over the air, in which the very light seemed to be affected
by the shock. She felt it in the arm which supported her, in the voice
which responded with a sudden emotion in it, and in the silence which
ensued, which neither of them seemed able to break.

“I fear,” said Edward at last, “that it will be very agitating and
distressing for you, my darling. I wish I could do it for you. I wish I
could put it off till you were stronger.”

She shook her head. “I must do it myself,” she said, “not even you. We
have been very quiet for a long time--and happy.”

“We shall be happy still, I hope,” he said,--“happier, since the time
is coming when we are always to be together, Winnie.”

She did not make any reply at first, but then said drearily, “I don’t
feel as if I could see anything beyond to-night. Life will go on again,
I suppose, but between this and that there seems to me, as in the
parable, a gulf fixed.”

“Not one that cannot be passed over,” he said.

But he did not ask her what she meant to say to her brother, nor had she
ever told him. Perhaps he took it for granted that only one thing could
be said, and that to be told what their father’s will was, would be
enough for the young men; or perhaps, for that was scarcely credible, he
supposed that Mr. Babington would be called upon to explain everything,
and the burden thus taken off her shoulders. Only when she was bidding
him good-night he ventured upon a word.

“You must husband your strength,” he said, “and not wear yourself out
more than you can help. Remember there is George to come.”

“I will have to say what there is to say at once, Edward. Oh, how could
I keep them in suspense?”

“But you must think a little, for my sake, of yourself, dear.”

She shook her head, and looked at him wistfully. “It is not I that have
to be thought of, it is the boys that I have to think of. Oh, poor boys!
how am I to tell them?” she cried.

And he went away with no further explanation. He could not ask in so
many words, What do you intend to say to them? And yet he had made up
his mind so completely what ought to be said. He said to himself as he
went down the avenue that he had been a fool, that it was false delicacy
on his part not to have had a full explanation of her intentions. But,
on the other hand, how could he suggest a mode of action to her? There
was but one way--they must understand that she could not sacrifice
herself for their sakes.




CHAPTER XIII


Winifred scarcely slept all that night. She had enough to think of. Her
entire life hung in the balance. And, indeed, that was not all, for
there remained the doubtful possibility that she might deprive herself
of everything without doing any good by her sacrifice. The necessity to
be falsely true seemed, once having been taken up, to pursue her
everywhere. Unless she could find some way of accomplishing it
deceitfully, and frustrating her father’s will, while she seemed to be
executing it, she would be incapable of doing anything for her brothers,
and would either be compelled to accept an unjust advantage over them,
or give up everything that was in her own favour without advantaging
them. She lay still in the darkness and thought and thought over this
great problem, but came no nearer to any solution. And she was separated
even from her usual counsellors in this great emergency. In respect to
Edward, she divined his wishes with a pang unspeakable, yet excused him
to herself with a hundred tender apologies. It was not that he was
capable of wronging any one, but he felt--who could help feeling
it?--that all would go better in his hands. She, too, felt it. She said
to herself, it would be better for Bedloe, better for the people, that
he, through her, should reign, instead of George or Tom, who, if they
did well at all, would do well for themselves only, and who, up to this
time, even in that had failed. To give it over to two bad or indifferent
masters, careless of everything, save what it produced; or to place it
under the care of a wise and thoughtful master, who would consider the
true advantage of all concerned: who, she asked herself, could hesitate
as to which was best? But though it would be best, it would be founded
on wrong, and would be impossible. Impossible! that was the only word.
She was in no position to abolish the ordinary laws of nature, and act
upon her own judgment of what was best. It was impossible, whatever good
might result from it, that she should build her own happiness upon the
ruin of her brothers. Even Miss Farrell did not take the same view of
the subject. She had wept over the dethronement of the brothers, but she
could not consent to Winifred’s renunciation of all things for their
sake. “You can always make it up to them,” she had said, reiterating the
words, without explaining how this was to be done. How was it to be
done? Winifred tried very hard through all to respect her father. She
tried to think that he had only exposed her to a severe trial to prove
her strength. She thought that now at least, even if never before, he
must be enlightened, he must watch her with those “larger, other eyes
than ours,” with which natural piety endows all who have passed away,
whether bad or good. Even if he had not intended well at the time, he
must know better now. But how was she to do it? How succeed in thwarting
yet obeying him? The problem was beyond her powers, and the hours would
not stop to give her time to consider it. They flowed on, slow, yet
following each other in a ceaseless current; and the morning broke which
was to bring her perplexities to some sort of issue, though what she did
not know.

Tom arrived by the early morning train. He also had not slept much in
the night, and his eyes were red, and his face pale. He was tremulous
with excitement, not unmingled with anxiety; but an air of triumph over
all, and elation scarcely controlled, gave a certain wildness to his
aspect, almost like intoxication. It was an intoxication of the spirit,
however, and not anything else, though, as he leapt out of the dog-cart
and made a rush up the steps, Winifred, standing there to meet him,
almost shrank from the careless embrace he gave her. “Well, Win, and so
here we are back again,” he said. He had no great reason, perhaps, to be
touched by his father’s death. It brought him back from unwilling work,
it gave him back (he thought) the wealth and luxury which he loved, it
restored him to all that had been taken from him. Why should he be
sorry? And yet, at the moment of returning to his father’s house, it
seemed to his sister that some natural thought of the father, who had
not always been harsh, should have touched his heart. But Tom did not
show any consciousness of what nature and good feeling required, which
was, after all, as Winifred reflected next moment, better, perhaps, as
being more true than any pretence at fictitious feeling. He gave nods of
acknowledgment, half boisterous, half condescending, to the servants as
he passed through the hall to the dining-room, which stood open, with
the table prepared for breakfast. He laughed at the sight, and pointed
to his sister. “It was supper you had waiting for me the last time I was
here,” he said, with a laugh, and went in before her, and threw himself
down in the large easy chair, which was the seat Mr. Chester had always
occupied. Probably Tom forgot, and meant nothing; but old Hopkins
hastened to thrust another close to the table, indicating it with a wave
of his hand.

“Here, sir, this is your place, sir,” the old butler said.

“I am very comfortable where I am,” cried Tom. “That’s enough, Hopkins;
bring the breakfast.” Hopkins explained to the other servants when he
left the room that Mr. Tom was excited. “And no wonder, considering all
that’s happened,” he said.

“Well,” repeated Tom, when he and his sister were left alone, “so here
we are again. You thought it was for good when I went away, Winnie.”

“I thought it would be--for a longer time, Tom.”

“You thought it was for good; but you might have known better. The poor
old governor thought better of it at the last?”

“I don’t think that he changed--his opinion,” Winifred said, hesitating,
afraid to carry on the deception, afraid to undeceive him, tired and
excited as he was.

“Well,” said Tom, addressing himself to the good things on the breakfast
table, “whatever his opinion was, it don’t matter much now, for here I
am, at all events, and that horrible episode of New Zealand over. It
didn’t last very long, thank Heaven!”

It was, perhaps, only because the conversation was so difficult that she
asked him then suddenly whether, perhaps, on the way he had seen
anything of George.

“Of George?” Tom put down his knife and fork and stared at her. “How, in
the name of Heaven, could I see anything of George--on my way home?”

“I--don’t know, Tom. I am not clear about the geography. I thought
perhaps you might have come by the same ship.”

“By the same ship?” It was only by degrees that he took in what she
meant. Then he thrust back his chair from the table and exclaimed,
“What! is George coming too?” in a tone full of disgust and dismay.

“I sent for him at the same time,” she replied, in spite of herself, in
a tone of apology. “How could I leave him out?”

“_You_ sent for him?” said Tom, with evident relief. “Then I think you
did a very silly thing, Winnie. Why should he come here, such an
expensive journey, stopping his work and everything? Some one told me he
was getting on very well out there.”

“I thought it indispensable that he should come back, that we should all
meet to arrange everything.”

“To arrange everything?” There was a sort of compassionate impatience in
Tom’s tone. “I suppose that is how women judge,” he said. “What can
there be to arrange? You may be sure the governor had it all set down
clear enough in black and white. And now you will have disturbed the
poor beggar’s mind all for nothing; for he is sure to build upon it,
and think there’s something for him. I hope, at least, you made that
point clear.”

“Tom, if you would but listen to me! There is no point clear. I felt
that I must see you both, and talk it all over, and that we must decide
among us”--

“You take a great deal upon you, Winnie,” said Tom. “You have got
spoilt, I think. What is there to decide about? The thing that vexes me
is for George’s own sake. That you might like to see him, and give him a
little holiday, that’s no harm; and I suppose you mean to make it up to
him out of your own little money, though I should think Langton would
have a word to say on that subject. But how do you know what ridiculous
ideas you may put into the poor beggar’s head? He may think that the
governor has altered his will again. He is sure to think something
that’s absurd. If it’s not too late, it would be charity to telegraph
again and tell him it was not worth his while.”

“Tom,” said Winifred, faltering, “he is our brother, and he is the
eldest. Whatever my father’s will was, do you think it would be right to
leave him out?”

“Oh, that is what you are after!” said Tom. “To work upon me, and get me
to do something for him! You may as well understand once for all that
I’ll be no party to changing the governor’s will--I’ll not have him
cheated, poor old gentleman! in his grave.”

He had risen up from the table full of angry decision, pushing his chair
away, while Winifred sat weak and helpless, more bewildered at every
word, gazing at him, not knowing how to reply.

“He was a man of great sense, was the governor,” said Tom. “He was a
better judge of character than either you or I. To be sure, he made a
little mistake that time about me; but it hasn’t done me any harm, and
I wouldn’t be the one to bring it up against him. And I’ll be no party
to changing his will. If you bring George here, it is upon your own
responsibility. He need not look for anything from me.”

“Tom, I don’t ask anything from you; but don’t you think--oh, is not
your heart softer now that you know what it is to suffer hardship
yourself?”

“That’s all sentimental nonsense,” said Tom hastily. He went to the
fireplace and warmed himself, for there is always a certain chill in
excitement. Then he returned to the table to finish his breakfast. He
had a feverish appetite, and the meal served to keep in check the fire
of expectation and restlessness in his veins. After a few minutes’
silence he looked up with a hurried question. “Babington has been sent
for to meet me, I suppose?”

“He is coming on Monday. We did not think you could arrive before
Monday, and George perhaps by that time”--

“Always George!” he said, with an angry laugh.

“Always both of you, Tom. We are only three in the world, and to whom
can I turn but to my brothers to advise me? Oh, listen a little! I want
you to know everything, to judge everything, and then to tell me”--

It was natural enough, perhaps, that Tom should think of her personal
concerns. “Oh, I see,” he said; “you and Langton don’t hit it off,
Winnie? That’s a different question. Well, he is not much of a match for
you. No doubt you could do much better for yourself; but that’s not
enough to call George for, from the Antipodes. I’ll advise you to the
best of my ability. If you mean to trust for advice to George”--

“It is not about myself,” said Winifred. “Oh, Tom, how am I to tell you?
I cannot find the words--my father--oh, listen to me for a
little--don’t go away!”

“If you say anything--to make me think badly of the governor, I will
never forgive you, Winnie!” he said. His face grew pale and then almost
black with gloom and excitement. “I’ve been travelling all night,” he
added. “I want a bath, and to make myself comfortable. It’s too soon to
begin about your business. Where have you put me? In the old room, I
suppose?”

“All your things have been put there,” replied Winifred. It was a relief
to escape from the explanation, and yet a disappointment. He turned away
without looking at her.

“Oh, all right! there is plenty of time to change when I have made up my
mind which I like best,” he said.




CHAPTER XIV


George arrived by the next mail. He did not travel all night, but came
in the evening, driving up the avenue with a good deal of noise and
commotion, with two flys from the station carrying him and the two
children and the luggage they brought, in addition to the brougham which
had been sent out of respect to the lady. She occupied it by herself,
for it was a small carriage, and she was a large woman, and thus was the
first to arrive, stumbling out with a large cage in her hand containing
a pair of unhappy birds with drooping feathers and melancholy heads. She
would not allow any one to take them from her hand, but stumbled up the
steps with them and thrust them upon Winnie, who had come out to the
door to receive her brother, but who did not at first realise who this
was.

“Here, take ’em,” said Mrs. George; “they’re for you, and they’ve been
that troublesome! I’ve done nothing but look after them all the voyage.
I suppose you’re Winnie,” she added, pausing with a momentary doubt.

“I hope you are not very tired,” Winifred said, with that imbecility
which extreme surprise and confusion gives. She took the cage, which was
heavy, and set it on a table. “And George--where is George?” she said.

“Oh, George is coming fast enough; he’s in the first fly with the
children. But you don’t look at what I’ve brought you. They’re the true
love-birds, the prettiest things in the world. I brought them all the
way myself. I trusted them to nobody. George said you would think a
deal of them.”

“So I shall--when I have time to think. It was very kind,” said Winnie.
“Oh, George!” She ran down to meet him as he stepped out with a child on
his arm.

George was not fat, like his wife, but careworn and spare.

“How do you do, Winnie?” he said, taking her outstretched hand. “Would
you mind taking the baby till I get Georgie and the things out of the
fly?”

The baby was a fat baby, and like his mother. He gazed at her with a
placid aspect, and did not cry. There was something ludicrous in the
situation, which Winifred faintly perceived, though everything was so
serious. George was not like the long-lost brother of romance. He had
shaken hands with her as if he had parted from her yesterday. He
scarcely cast a glance at the house to which he was coming back, but
turned quickly to the fly, and lifted out first a little fat boy of
three, then parcel after parcel, with a slightly anxious but quite
business-like demeanour.

“The maid and the boxes can go round to the other door,” he said, paying
serious attention to every detail. “I suppose I can leave these things
to be brought upstairs, Winnie? Now, Georgie, come along. There’s mamma
waiting.” He did not offer to take the baby, which was a serious weight
upon Winifred’s slight shoulder, but looked with a certain grave
gratification at his progeny. “He is quite good with you,” he said, with
pleased surprise. There was nothing in the fact of his return home that
affected George so much. “Look at baby, how good he is with Winnie! I
told you the children would take to her directly.”

“Well, I suppose it’s natural your sister should look to you first,”
said the wife; “but I’ve taken a great deal of trouble bringing the
birds to her, and she hasn’t given them hardly a glance.”

“It was very kind,” said Winnie; “but the children must come first. This
is the way; don’t you remember, George? Bring your wife here.”

“I don’t believe she knows my name, or perhaps she’s proud, and won’t
call me by it, George?”

“Winnie proud? Look how good baby is with her!” said George.

They discussed Winifred thus, walking on either side of her, while she
tottered under the weight of the big baby, from which neither dreamt of
relieving her. Winifred began to feel a nervous necessity to laugh,
which she could not control. She drew a chair near the fire for her
sister-in-law, and put down the good-humoured baby, in whose contact
there seemed something consolatory, though he was very heavy, on the
rug. “I should like to give the other one a kiss,” she said--“is he
George too?--before I give you some tea.”

“Yes, I should like my tea,” said Mrs. George; “I’m ready for it after
that long journey. Have you seen after Eliza and the boxes, George?
We’ve had a good passage upon the whole; but I should never make a good
sailor if I were to make the voyage every year. Some people can never
get over it. Don’t you think, Miss Winnie, that you could tell that old
gentleman to bring the birds in here?”

“Is it old Hopkins?” said George. “How do you do, Hopkins? There is a
cage with some birds”--

“I hope I see you well, sir?” said the old butler. “I’m glad as I’ve
lived to see you come home. And them two little gentlemen, sir, they’re
the first little grandsons? and wouldn’t master have been pleased to see
them!” Hopkins had been growing feeble ever since his master’s death,
and showed a proclivity to tears, which he had never dared to indulge
before.

“Well, I think he might have been,” said George, with a dubious tone.
But his mind was not open to sentiment. “They might have a little bread
and butter, don’t you think?--it wouldn’t hurt them,--and a cup of
milk.”

“No, George,” said his wife; “it would spoil their tea.”

“Do you think it would spoil their tea? I am sure Winnie would not mind
them having their tea here with us, the first evening, and then Eliza
might put them to bed.”

“Eliza has got my things to look to,” said Mrs. George; “besides being
put out a little with a new place, and all that houseful of servants. I
shouldn’t keep up half of them, when once we have settled down and see
how we are going to fit in.”

“Some one must put the children to bed,” said George, with an anxious
countenance. This conversation was carried on without any apparent
consciousness of Winnie’s presence, who, what with pouring out tea and
making friends with the children, did her best to occupy the place of
spectator with becoming unconsciousness. Here, however, she was suddenly
called into the discussion. “Oh, Winnie,” said her brother, “no doubt
you’ve got a maid, or some one who knows a little about children, who
could put them to bed?”

“He is an old coddle about the children,” said his wife; “the children
will take no harm. Eliza must see to me first, if I’m to come down to
dinner as you’d wish me to. But George is the greatest old coddle.”

She ran into a little ripple of laughter as she spoke, which was fat and
pleasant. Her form was soft and round, and prettily coloured, though her
features, if she had ever possessed any, were much blunted and rounded
into indistinctness. A sister is, perhaps, a severe judge under such
circumstances; yet Winifred was relieved and softened by the new
arrival. She made haste to offer the services of her maid, or even her
own, if need were. The house was turned entirely upside down by this
arrival. The two babies sent a thrill of excitement through all the
female part of the household, from Miss Farrell downwards, and old
Hopkins was known to have wept in the pantry over the two little
grandsons, whom master would have been so proud to see. Winifred alone
felt her task grow heavier and heavier. The very innocence and
helplessness of the party whom she had thus taken in hand, and whom,
after all, she was likely to have so little power to help, went to her
heart. She was not fitted to play the part of Providence. And certain
looks exchanged between George and his wife, and a few chance words, had
made her heart sick. They had pointed out to each other how this and
that could be changed. “The rooms in the wing would be best for the
nurseries,” George had said and “There’s just the place for you to
practise your violin,” his wife had added. They looked about them with a
serene and satisfied consciousness (though George was always anxious)
that they were taking possession of their own house. Winifred felt as
she came back into the hall, where Mrs. George’s present was still
standing, the cage with the two miserable birds, laying their drooping
heads together, that this simplicity was more hard to deal with than
even Tom’s discontent and sullen anger. She felt that she had collected
elements of mischief together with which she was quite unable to deal,
and stood in the midst of them discouraged, miserable, feeling herself
disapproved and unsupported. Not even Edward stood by her. Edward, least
of all, whose want of sympathy she felt to her soul, though it had never
been put into words. And Miss Farrell’s attempts to make the best were
almost worse than disapproval. She was entirely alone with those
contending elements, and what was she to do?

Tom had chosen to be absent when his brother arrived; he did not appear
even at dinner, to which Mrs. George descended, to the surprise of the
ladies, decked in smiles and in an elaborate evening dress, which (had
they but known) she had spent all the spare time on the voyage in
preparing out of the one black silk which had been the pride of her
heart. She had shoulders and arms which were worth showing had they not
been a trifle too fat, so white and rosy, so round and dimpled. She made
a little apology to Winifred for the absence of crape. “It was such a
hurry,” she said, “to get away at once. George would not lose a day, and
I wouldn’t let him go without me, and such things as that are not to be
got on a ship,” she added, with a laugh. Mrs. George’s aspect, indeed,
did not suggest crape or gloom in any way.

“No, I wouldn’t let him come without me,” she continued, while they sat
at dinner. “I couldn’t take the charge of the children without him to
help me, and then I thought he might be put upon if he came to take
possession all alone. I didn’t know that Miss Winnie was as nice as she
is, and would stand his friend.”

“She is very nice,” said Miss Farrell, to whom this remark was
addressed, looking across the table at her pupil with eyes that
glistened, though there was laughter in them. The sight of this pair,
and especially of the wife with her innocence and good-humour, had been
very consoling to the old lady. And she was anxious to awaken in
Winifred a sense of the humour of the situation to relieve her more
serious thoughts.

“But then I had never seen her,” said Mrs. George; “and it’s so natural
to think your husband’s sister will be nasty when she thinks herself a
cut above the like of you. I thought she might brew up a peck of
troubles for George, and make things twice as hard.”

“I wish you wouldn’t talk so much,” her husband said under his breath.

“Why shouldn’t I talk? I’m only saying what’s agreeable. I am saying I
never thought she would be so nice. I thought she might stand in
George’s way. I am sure it might make any one nasty that was likely to
marry and have children of her own, to see everything going past her to
a brother that had behaved like George has done and taken his own way.”

This innocent conversation went on till Winifred felt her part become
more and more intolerable. Her paleness, her hesitating replies, and
anxious air at last caught George’s attention, though he had little to
spare for his sister. “Have you been ill, Winnie?” he said abruptly, as
he followed them into the drawing-room when dinner was over.

“Yes, George,” she put her hand on his arm timidly; “and I am ill now
with anxiety and trouble. I have something to say to you.”

George was always ready to take alarm. He grew a little more depressed
as he looked at her. “Is it anything about the property?” he said.

“I never thought to deceive you,” she cried, losing command of herself.
“I did not know. I thought it would be all simple, George--oh, if you
will hear me to the end! and let us all consult together and see what
will be best.”

George did not make her any reply. He looked across at his wife, and
said, “I told you there would be something,” with lips that quivered a
little. Mrs. George got up instantly and came and stood beside him, all
her full-blown softness reddening over with quick passion. “What is it?
Have I spoke too fast? Is there some scheme against us after all?” she
cried.

“George,” said Winifred, “you know I am in no scheme against you. I want
to give you your rights--but it seems I cannot. I want you to know
everything, to help me to think. Tom will not hear me, he will not
believe me; but you, George!”

“Tom?” George cried. The news seemed so unexpected that his astonishment
and dismay were undisguised. “Is Tom here?”

“I sent for you both on the same day,” said Winifred, bowing her head as
if it were a confession of guilt.

“Oh,” he said; he did not show excitement in its usual form, he grew
quieter and more subdued, standing in a sort of grey insignificance
against the flushed fulness of his astonished wife. “If it is Tom,” he
said, “you might as well have let us stay where we were. He never held
up a finger for me when my father sent me away. You did your best,
Winnie; oh, I am not unjust to you. Whatever it is, it’s not your fault.
But Tom--if Tom has got it! though I thought he had been sent about his
business too.”

“But, George, George!” cried his wife, almost inarticulate with
eagerness to speak. “George, you’re the eldest son. I want to know if
you’re the eldest son, yes or no? And after that, who--who has any
right? I’m in my own house and I’ll stay. It’s my own house, and nobody
shall put me out,” she cried, with a hysterical laugh, followed by a
burst of tears.

“Stop that,” said George, with dull quiet, but authoritatively. “I don’t
mean to say it isn’t an awful disappointment, Winnie; but if it’s Tom,
why did you go and send for me?”

Winifred stood between the two, the wife sobbing wildly behind her, her
brother looking at her in a sort of dull despair, and stretched out her
hands to them with an appeal for which she could find no words. But at
that moment the door opened harshly and Tom came in, appearing at the
end of the room, with a pale and gloomy countenance, made only more
gloomy by wine and fatigue, for he had ridden far and wildly, dashing
about the country to exhaust his rage and disappointment. All that he
had done had been to increase both. “Oh, you have got here,” he said,
with an angry nod to his brother. “It is a nice home-coming ain’t it,
for you and me? Shake hands; we’re in the same boat now, whatever we
once were. And there stands the supplanter, the hypocrite that has got
everything!” cried the excited young man, the foam flying from his
mouth. And thereupon came a shriek from Mrs. George, which went through
poor Winifred like a knife. For some minutes she heard no more.




CHAPTER XV


Winifred had never fainted before in her life, and it made a great
commotion in the house. Hopkins, without a word to any one, sent off for
Dr. Langton, and half the maids in the house poured into the room
eagerly to help, bringing water, eau de Cologne, everything they could
think of. Mrs. George’s hysterics fled before the alarming sight, the
insensibility, and pallor, which for a moment she took for death, and
with a cry of horror and pity, and the tears still standing upon her
flushed cheeks, she flung herself on her knees on the floor by
Winifred’s side. The two brothers stood and looked on, feeling very
uncomfortable, gazing with a half-guilty aspect upon the fallen figure.
Would any one perhaps say that it was their fault? They stood near each
other, though without exchanging a word, while the sudden irruption of
women poured in. Winifred, however, was not long of coming to her
senses. She woke to find herself lying on the floor, to her great
astonishment, in the midst of a little crowd, and then struggled back
into full consciousness again with a head that ached and throbbed, and
something singing in her ears. She got to her feet with an effort and
begged their pardon faintly. “What has happened?” she said; “have I done
any thing strange? what have I done?”

“You have only fainted,” said Miss Farrell, “that is all. Miss Chester
is better now. She has no more need of you, you may all go. Yes, my
dear, you have fainted, that is all. Some girls are always doing it; but
it never happened to you before, and it ought to be a proof to you,
Winnie, that you are only mortal after all, and can’t do more than you
can.”

Winifred smiled as best she could in the face of her old friend. “I did
not know I could be so foolish,” she said; “but it is all over now. Dear
Miss Farrell, leave me with them. There is something I must say.”

“Oh, put it off till to-morrow,” said Mrs. George; “whether you’ve been
our enemy or not, you are only a bit of a girl; and it can’t hurt to
wait till to-morrow. I know what nerves are myself, I’ve always been a
dreadful sufferer. A dead faint like that, it is very frightening to
other people. Don’t send the old lady away.”

“I am going to stay with you, Winnie--unless you will be advised by me,
and by Mrs. George, who has a kind heart, I am sure she has--and go to
bed.”

Winifred placed herself in a deep easy-chair which gave her at least a
physical support. She gave her hand to Miss Farrell, who stood by her,
and turned to the brothers, who were still looking on uneasily,
half-conscious that it was their fault, half-defiant of her and all that
she could say. She lifted her eyes to them, in that moment of weakness
and uncertainty before the world settled back into its place. Even their
faces for a little while were but part of a phantasmagoria that moved
and trembled in the air around her. She felt herself as in a dream,
seeing not only what was before her, but many a visionary scene behind.
She had been the youngest, she had always yielded to the boys; and as
they stood before her thus, though with so few features of the young
playfellows and tyrants to whom all her life she had been more or less
subject, it became more and more impossible to her to assume the
different part which an ill fate had laid upon her. As she looked at
them, so many scenes came back. They had been fond of her and good to
her in their way, when she was a child. She suddenly remembered how
George used to carry her up and down-stairs when she was recovering from
the fever which was the great event in her childish life, and in how
many rides and rows she had been Tom’s companion, grateful above measure
for his notice. These facts, with a hundred trivial incidents which she
had forgotten, rushed back upon her mind. “Boys,” she said, and then
paused, her eyes growing clearer and clearer, but tears getting into her
voice.

“Come, Winnie,” said George, “Tom and I are a little too old for that.”

“You will never be too old for that to me,” she said. “Oh, if you would
but look a little kind, as you used to do! It was against my will and
my prayers that it was left to me. I said that I would not accept it,
that I would never, never, take what was yours. I never deceived him in
that. Oh, boys! do you think it is not terrible for me to be put into
your place, even for a moment? And that is not the worst. I thought when
I sent for you that I could give it you back, that it would all be easy;
but there is more to tell you.”

They looked at her, each in his different way. Tom sullenly from under
his eyebrows, George with his careworn look, anxious to get to an end of
it, to consult with his wife what they were to do; but neither said a
word.

“After,” she said with difficulty, struggling against the rising in her
throat, “after--it was found that I could not give it you back. If I did
so, I too was to lose everything. Oh, wait, wait, till I have done! What
am I to do? I put it in your hands. If I try to give you any part, it
is lost to us all three. What am I to do? I can take no advice from any
but you. What I wish is to restore everything to you; but if I attempt
to do so, all is lost. What am I to do? What am I to do?”

“Winnie, what you will do is to make yourself ill in the meantime.”

“What does it matter?” she cried wildly; “if I were to die, I suppose it
would go to them as my heirs.”

The blank faces round her had no pity in them for Winnie. They were for
the moment too deeply engrossed with the news which they had just heard.
Miss Farrell alone stooped over her, and stood by her, holding her hand.
Mrs. George, who had been listening, bewildered, unable to divine what
all this could mean, broke the silence with a cry.

“She don’t say a word of Georgie. Is there nothing for Georgie? I don’t
know what you mean, all about giving and not giving--it’s our right.
George, ain’t it our right?”

“There are no rights in our family,” said George; “but I don’t know what
it means any more than you.”

Here Tom stepped forward into the midst of the group, lifting his sullen
eyebrows. “I know what it means,” he said. “It is easy enough to tell
what it means. If she takes you in, she can’t take me in. I saw how
things were going long ago. First one was got out of the house and then
another, but she was always there, saying what she pleased, getting over
the old man. Do you think if he had been in his right senses, he would
have driven away his sons, and put a girl over our heads? I’ll tell you
what,” he cried with passion, “I am not going to stand it if you are.
She was there always at one side of him, and the doctor at the other.
The daughter and the doctor and nobody else. Every one knows how a
doctor can work upon your nerves; and a woman that is always nursing
you, making herself sweet. If there ever was undue influence, there it
is. And I don’t mean to stand it for one.”

George was not enraged like his brother: he looked from one to another
with his anxious eyes. “If you don’t stand it, what can you do?” he
said.

“I mean to bring it to a trial. I mean to take it into court. There
isn’t a jury in England but would give it in our favour,” said Tom. “I
know a little about the law. It is the blackest case I ever knew. The
doctor, Langton, he is engaged to Winnie. He has put her up to it; I
don’t blame her so much. He has stood behind her making a cat’s-paw of
her. Oh, I’ve found out all about it. He belongs to the old family that
used to own Bedloe, and he has had his eye on this ever since we came
here. The governor was very sharp,” said Tom, “he was not one to be
beaten in the common way. But the doctor, that was always handy, that
came night and day, that cured him--the _first_ time,” he added
significantly.

Tom, in his fury, had not observed, nor had any of his agitated hearers,
the opening of the door behind, the quiet entry into the room of a
new-comer, who, arrested by the words he heard, had stood there
listening to what Tom said. At this moment he advanced quickly up the
long room. “You think perhaps that I killed him--the second time?” he
said, confronting the previous speaker.

Winifred rose from her chair with a low cry, and came to his side,
putting her arm through his.

“Edward! Edward! he does not know what he is saying,” she cried.

The other pair had stood bewildered during all this, Mrs. George gasping
with her pretty red lips apart, her husband, always careworn, looking
anxiously from one face to another. When she saw Winnie’s sudden
movement, Mrs. George copied it in her way. She was cowed by the
appearance of the doctor, who was so evidently a gentleman, one of those
superior beings for whom she retained the awe and admiration of her
youth.

“Oh, George, come to bed! don’t mix yourself up with none of them--don’t
get yourself into trouble!” she cried, doing what she could to drag him
away.

“Let alone, Alice,” he said, disengaging himself. “I suppose you are Dr.
Langton. My brother couldn’t mean that; but if things are as he says,
it’s rather a bad case.”

A fever of excitement, restrained by the habit of self-command, and
making little appearance, had risen in Langton’s veins. “Winifred,” he
cried, with the calm of passion, “you have been breaking your heart to
find out a way of serving your brothers. You see how they receive it.
Retire now, you are not able to deal with them, and leave it to me.”

She was clinging to him with both hands, clasping his arm, very weak,
shaken both in body and mind, longing for quietness and rest; but she
shook her head, looking up with a pathetic smile in his face.

“No, Edward,” she said.

“No?” he looked at her, not believing his ears. She had never resisted
him before, even when his counsels were most repugnant to her. A sudden
passionate offence took possession of him. “In that case,” he said,
“perhaps it is I that ought to withdraw, and allow your brother to
accuse me of every crime at his ease.”

“Oh, Edward, don’t make it harder! It is hard upon us all, both them and
me. It is desperate, the position we are in. I cannot endure it, and
they cannot endure it. What are we to do?”

“Nor can I endure it,” he said. “Let them contest the will. It is the
best way; but in that case they cannot remain under your roof.”

“Who gave you the right to dictate what we are to do?” cried Tom, who
was beside himself with passion. “This is my father’s house, not yours.
It is my sister’s, if you like, but not yours. Winnie, let that fellow
go; what has he got to do between us? Let him go away; he has got
nothing to do here.”

“You are of that opinion too?” Langton said, turning to her with a pale
smile. “Be it so. I came to look after Miss Chester’s health, not to
disturb a family party.”

“Edward!” Winifred cried. The name he gave her went to her heart. He had
detached himself from her hold; he would not see the hand which she held
out to him. His ear was deaf to her voice. She had deserted him, he said
to himself. She had brought insult upon him, and an atrocious
accusation, and she had not resented it, showed no indignation, rejected
his help, prepared to smooth over and conciliate the miserable cad who
had permitted himself to do this thing. Beneath all this blaze of
passion, there was no doubt also the bitterness of disappointment with
which he saw the destruction of those hopes which he had been foolishly
entertaining, allowing himself to cherish, although he knew all the
difficulties in the way. He saw and felt that, right or wrong, she would
give all away, that Bedloe was farther from him than ever it had been.
He loved Winifred, it was not for Bedloe he had sought her; but
everything surged up together at this moment in a passion of
mortification, resentment, and shame. She had not maintained his cause,
she had refused his intervention, she had allowed these intruders to
regard him as taking more upon him than she would permit, claiming an
authority she would not grant. He neither looked at her, nor listened to
the call which she repeated with a cry that might have moved a savage. A
man humiliated, hurt in his pride, is worse than a savage.

“Take care of her,” he said, wringing Miss Farrell’s hand as he passed
her, and without another look or word went away.

Winifred, standing, following with her eyes, with consternation
unspeakable, his departing figure, felt the strength ebb out of her as
he disappeared. But yet there was relief in his departure, too. A woman
has often many pangs to bear between her husband and her family. She has
to endure and maintain often the authority which she does not
acknowledge, which in her right he assumes over them, which is a still
greater offence to her than to them; and an instinctive sense that her
lover should not have any power over her brothers was strong in her
notwithstanding her love. Her agitated heart returned after a moment’s
pause to the problem which was no nearer solution than before. She said
softly--

“All that I can do for your sake I will do, whatever I may suffer. There
is one thing I will not do, and that is, defend myself or him. If you do
not know that neither I nor he have done anything against you, it is not
for me to say it. It is hard, very hard for us all. If you will advise
with me like friends what to do, I shall be very, very thankful; but if
not, you must do what you will, and I will do what I can, and there is
no more to say.”

The interruption, though it had been hard to bear, had done her good.
She went back to her chair, and leant back, letting her head rest on
good Miss Farrell’s faithful shoulder. A kind of desperation had come to
her. She had sent her lover away, and nothing remained for her, but only
this forlorn duty.

“Edward will not come back,” she said in Miss Farrell’s ear.

“To-morrow, my darling, to-morrow,” the old lady said, with tears in her
eyes.

Winifred shook her head. No one could deceive her any more. She seemed
to have come to that farthest edge of life on which everything becomes
plain. After a while she withdrew, leaving the others to their
consultation; they had been excited by Edward’s coming, but they were
cowed by his going away. It seemed to bring to all a strange
realisation, such as people so often reach through the eyes of others,
of the real state of their affairs.




CHAPTER XVI


Enough had been done and said that night. They remained together for
some time in the drawing-room, having the outside aspect of a family
party, but separated, as indeed family parties often are. Winifred, very
pale, with the feeling of exhaustion both bodily and mental, sat for a
time in her chair, Miss Farrell close to her, holding her hand. They
said nothing to each other, but from time to time the old lady would
bend over her pupil with a kiss of consolation, or press between her own
the thin hand she held. She said nothing, and Winifred, indeed, was
incapable of intercourse more articulate. On the other side of the
fireplace George and his wife sat together, whispering and consulting.
She was very eager, he careworn and doubtful, as was his nature.
Sometimes he would shake his head, saying, “No, Alice,” or “It is not
possible.” Sometimes her eager whispering came to an articulate word.
Their anxious discussion, the close union of two beings whose interests
were one, the life and expectation and anxiety in their looks, made a
curious contrast to the exhaustion of Winnie lying back in her chair,
and the sullen loneliness of Tom, who sat in the centre in front of the
fire, receiving its full blaze upon him in a sort of ostentatious
resentment and sullenness, though his hand over his eyes concealed the
thought in his face. The only sound was the whispering of Mrs. George,
and the occasional low word with which her husband replied. Further, no
communication passed between the different members of this strange
party. They separated after a time with faint good-nights, Mrs. George
eager, indeed, to maintain the forms of civility, but the brothers each
in his way withdrawing with little show of friendship. After this,
Winifred too went upstairs. Her heart was very full.

“Did you ever,” she said to her companion “feel a temptation to run
away, to bear no more?”

“Yes, I have felt it; but no one can run away. Where could we go that
our duty would not follow us? It is shorter to do it anyhow at first
hand.”

“Is it so?” said Winifred, with a forlorn look from the window into the
night where the stars were shining, and the late moon rising. “‘Oh that
I had the wings of a dove!’--I don’t think I ever understood before what
that meant.”

“And what does it mean, Winnie? The dove flies home, not into the
wilds, which is what you are thinking of.”

“That is true,” said the girl, “and I have no home, except with you. I
have still you”--

“He will come back to-morrow,” Miss Farrell said.

“No, he will not come back. They insulted him, and I--did not want him.
That is true. I did not want him. I wanted none of his advice. I
preferred to be left to do what I had to do myself. It is true, Miss
Farrell. Can a man ever forgive that? It would have been natural that he
should have done everything for me, and instead of that--Are not these
all great mysteries?” said Winifred after a pause. “A woman should not
be able to do so. She should put herself into the hands of her husband.
Am I unwomanly?--you used to frighten me with the word; but I could not
do it. I did not want him. My heart rose against his interference. If I
knew that he felt so to me, I--I should be wounded to death. And yet--it
was so--it is quite true. I think he will never forgive me.”

“It is a mystery, Winnie. I don’t know how it is. When you are married
everything changes, or so people say. But love forgives everything,
dear.”

“Not that,” Winifred said.

She sat by her fire, when her friend left her, in a state of mind which
it is impossible to describe in words. It was despair. Despair is
generally tragical and exalted; and perhaps that passion is more easy to
bear with the excitement that belongs to it than the quiet consciousness
that one has come to a dead pause in one’s life, and that neither on one
side or the other is there any outlet. Winifred was perfectly calm and
still. She sat amid all the comfort of her chamber, gazing dimly into
the cheerful fire. She was rich. She was highly esteemed. She had many
friends. And yet she had come to a pass when everything failed her. Her
brothers stood hostile about her, feeling her with justice to be their
supplanter, to stand in their way. Her lover had left her, feeling with
justice that she wronged his love and rejected his aid. With
justice--that was the sting. To be misunderstood is terrible, yet it is
a thing that can be surmounted; but to be guilty, whether by any fault
of yours, whether by terrible complication of events, whether by the
constitution of your mind, which is the worst of all, this is despair.
And there was no way of deliverance. She could not make over her
undesired wealth to her brothers, which had at first seemed to be so
easy a way; and also, far worse, far deeper, far more terrible, she
could not make Edward see how she could put him away from her, yet love
him. She felt herself to sit alone, as if upon a pinnacle of solitude,
regarding all around and seeing no point from which there could come any
help. It is seldom that the soul is thus overwhelmed on all sides. When
one hope fails, another dawns upon the horizon; rarely, rarely is there
no aid near. But to Winifred it seemed that everything was gone from
her. Her lover and friends stood aloof. Her life was cut off. To
liberate every one and turn evil into good, the thing best to be done
seemed that she should die. But she knew that of all aspirations in the
world that is the most futile. Death does not come to the call of
misery. Those who would die, live on: those who would live are stricken
in the midst of their happiness. Perhaps to a more cheerful and buoyant
nature the crisis would have been less terrible; but to her it seemed
that everything was over, and life come to a standstill. She was
baffled and foiled in all that she wished, and that which she did not
desire was forced upon her. There seemed no strength left in her to
fight against all the adverse forces around. Her heart failed
altogether, and she felt in herself no power even to meet them, to begin
again the discussion, to hear again, perhaps, the baseless threat which
had driven Edward away. Ah, it was not that which had driven him away.
It was she herself who had been the cause; she who had not wanted him,
who even now, in the bitterness of the loss, which seemed to her as if
it must be for ever, still felt a faint relief in the thought that at
least no conflict between his will and hers would embitter the crisis,
and that she should be left undisturbed to do for her brothers all that
could be done, alone.

Next day she was so shaken and worn out with the experiences of that
terrible evening, that she kept her room and saw no one, save Miss
Farrell. Edward made no appearance; he did not even inquire for her, and
till the evening, when Mr. Babington arrived, Winifred saw no one. The
state of the house, in which George and his family held a sort of
encampment on one side, and Tom a hostile position on the other, was a
very strange one. There was a certain forlorn yet tragi-comic separation
between them. Even in the dining-room, where they sat at table together,
Mrs. George kept nervously at one end, as far apart as she could place
herself from her brother-in-law. The few words that were interchanged
between the brothers she did everything in her power to interrupt or
stop. She kept George by her side, occupied him with the children,
watched over him with a sort of unquiet care. Tom had assumed his
father’s place at the foot of the table before the others perceived
what that meant. They established themselves at the head, George and
his wife together, talking to each other in low voices, while there was
no one with whom Tom could make up a faction. The servants walked with
strange looks from the one end to the other, serving the two groups who
were separated by the white stretch of flower-decorated table. Old
Hopkins groaned, yet so reported the matter that the company in the
housekeeper’s room shook their sides with mirth. “It was for all the
world like one of them big hotels as I’ve been to many a time with
master. Two lots, with a scoff and a scowl for everything that each
other did.” Notwithstanding this disunion, however, the two brothers had
several conferences in the course of the day. They had a common
interest, though they thus pitted themselves against each other. It was
Tom who was the chief spokesman in these almost stealthy interviews.
Tom was so sore and resentful against his sister, that he was willing to
make common cause with George against her.

“If it is as she says,” he said, “there’s no jury in England but would
find undue influence, and perhaps incapacity for managing his own
affairs. We have the strongest case I ever heard of.”

“I don’t believe you’ll get a jury against Winnie,” said George, shaking
his head.

“Why shouldn’t we get a jury against Winnie? She has stolen into my
place and your place, and set the governor against us.”

“Perhaps she has,” said George; “but you won’t get a jury against her.”

“Why not? There is no man in the world that would say otherwise than
that ours was a hard case.”

“Oh yes, it is a very hard case; but you would not get a jury against
Winnie,” George repeated, with that admirable force of passive
resistance and blunted understanding which is beyond all argument.

This was what they talked of when they walked up and down the
conservatory together in the afternoon. Tom was eager, George doubtful;
but yet they were more or less of accord on this subject. It was a hard
case--no one would say otherwise; and though George could not in his
heart get himself to believe that any argument would secure a verdict
against Winnie, yet it was a case, it was evident, in which something
ought to be done, and he began to yield to Tom’s certainty. When Mr.
Babington arrived, they both met him with a certain expectation.

“We can’t stand this, you know,” said Tom. “It is not in nature to
suppose that we could stand it.”

“Oh, can’t you?” Mr. Babington said.

“Tom thinks,” his brother explained in his slow way, “that there has
been undue influence.”

“The poor old governor must have been going off his head. It is as clear
as daylight: he never could have made such a will if he hadn’t been off
his head; and Winnie and this doctor one on each side of him. Such a
will can never stand,” said Tom.

“But I say he’ll never get a jury against Winnie,” said George, with his
anxious eyes fixed on Mr. Babington’s face.

The lawyer listened to this till they had done, and then he said, “Oh,
that is what you think!” and burst into a peal of laughter. “Your father
was the sort of person, don’t you think, to be made to do what he didn’t
want to do? I don’t think I should give much for your chance if that is
what you build upon.”

This laugh, more than all the reasoning in the world, took the courage
out of Tom, and George had never had any courage. They listened with
countenances much cast down to Mr. Babington’s narrative of their
father’s proceedings, and of how Winnie was bound, and how Mr. Chester
had intended to bind her. They neither of them were clever enough to
remark that there were some points upon which he gave them no
information, though he seemed so certain and explicit. But they were
both completely lowered and subdued after an hour of his society,
recognising for the first time the desperate condition of affairs.

That evening, when Winnie, weary of her day’s seclusion, sick at heart
to feel her own predictions coming true, and to realise that Edward had
let the day pass without a word, was sitting sadly in her dressing-gown
before her fire, there came a knock softly at her door, late in the
evening, when the household in general had gone to bed. She turned
round with a little start and exclamation, and her surprise was not
lessened when she perceived that her visitor was Tom. He came in with
scarcely a word, and drew a chair near her, and sat down in front of the
fire.




CHAPTER XVII


There is, among the members of many families, a frank familiarity which
dispenses with all those forms which keep life on a level of courtesy
with persons not related to each other. Tom did not think it necessary
to ask his sister how she was, or to show any anxiety about her health.
He drew his chair forward and seated himself near her, without any
formulas.

“You know how to make yourself comfortable,” he said, with a glance
round the room, which indeed was very luxuriously furnished, like the
rest of the house, and with some taste, which was Winifred’s own. The
tone in which he spoke conveyed a subtle intimation that Winifred made
herself comfortable at his expense, but he did not say so in words. He
stretched out his feet towards the fire. Perhaps he found it a little
difficult to come to the point.

“I am sorry,” said Winifred, “to have been shut up here. If I had been
stronger--but you must remember I have had an illness, Tom; and to feel
that you were both against me”--

“Oh, it doesn’t matter about that,” said Tom, with a wave of his hand.
Then, after a pause, “In that you’re mistaken, Winnie. I’m not against
you. A fellow could not but be disappointed to find what a different
position he was in, after the telegram and all. But when one comes to
hear all about it, I’m not against you: I’m rather--though perhaps you
won’t believe me--on your side.”

“Oh, Tom!” cried Winifred, laying her hand upon his arm; “I am too glad
to believe you. If you will only stand by me, Tom”--

“Oh yes,” he said, “I’ll stand by you. I’ve been thinking it over since
last night. You want some one to be on your side, Winnie. When I saw the
airs of--But never mind, I have been thinking it all over, and I am on
your side.”

“If that is so, I shall be able to bear almost anything,” said Winifred
faintly.

“You will have George to bear and his wife. They say women never can put
up with other women. And, good heavens, to think that for a creature
like that he should have stood out and lost his chances with the
governor! I never was a fool in that way, Winnie. If I went wrong, it
was for nobody else’s sake, but to please myself. I should never have
let a girl stand in my way--not even pretty, except in a poor sort of
style, and fat at that age.” Here Tom made a brief pause. “But of
course you know I shall want something to live on,” he said.

“I know that you shall have everything that I can give you,” Winifred
cried.

“Ah! but that’s easier said than done. We must not run against the will,
that is clear. I’ve been thinking it over, as I tell you, and my idea
is, that after a little time, when you have taken possession and got out
of Mr. Babington’s hands and all that, you might make me a present, as
it were. Of course your sense of justice will make it a handsome
present, Winnie.”

“You shall have half, Tom. I have always meant you should have half.”

“Half?” he said. “It’s rather poor, you’ll allow, to have to come down
to that after fully making up one’s mind that one was to have
everything!”

“But, Tom, you would not have left George out--you would not have had
the heart!”

“Oh, the heart!” said Tom. “I shouldn’t have stood upon ceremony,
Winnie; and besides, I always had more respect for the poor old governor
than any of you. It suits my book that you should go against him, but I
shouldn’t have done it, had it been me. Well, half! I suppose that’s
fair enough. You couldn’t be expected to do more. But you must be very
cautious how you do it, you know. It’s awfully unbusiness-like, and
would have made the governor mad to think of. You must just get the
actual money, sell out, or realise, or whatever they call it, and give
it to me. Nothing that requires any papers or settlements or anything.
You will have to get the actual money and give it me. You had better do
it at different times, so many thousand now, and so many thousand then.
It will feel awfully queer getting so much money actually in one’s
hand--but nice,” Tom added, with a little laugh. He got up and stood
with his back to the fire, looking down upon her. “Nice in its way, if
one could forget that it ought to have been so much more.”

“Tom, you will be careful and not spend too much--you will not throw it
all away?”

“Catch me!” he said. “I’ll tell you what I mean to do, Winnie. I’ll go
on the Stock Exchange. The governor’s old friends will lend me a hand,
thinking mine a hard case, as it is. And then it’s easy to make them
believe I’ve been lucky, or inherit (as I believe I do) the governor’s
head for business. It would be droll if some of us hadn’t got that, and
I am sure it’s neither George nor you. Well, then, that’s settled,
Winnie. It will be easy to find out from Babington what the half is: a
precious big figure, I don’t doubt,” he added, with a triumph which for
the moment he forgot to disguise. Then he added after a moment, in a
more indifferent tone, “There is no telling what may happen when a man
is once launched. If you give me your share to work the markets with,
you can do anything on the Stock Exchange with a lot of money. I’ll
double your money for you in a year or two, which will be as good as
giving it all back.”

“I don’t know anything about the Stock Exchange, Tom; only don’t lose
your money speculating.”

“Oh, trust me for that!” he said. “I tell you I am the one that has got
the governor’s head.” Then it seemed to strike him for the first time
that it would not be amiss to show some regard for his sister. He
brought his hand down somewhat heavily on her shoulder, which made her
start violently.

“Come,” he said, “you must not be down-hearted, Win. If I was a little
nasty at first, can’t you understand that? And now I’ve made up my mind
to it, there’s nothing to look so grave about. I’ll stand by you
whatever happens.”

“Thank you, Tom,” she said faintly.

“You needn’t thank me; it’s I that ought to thank you, I suppose. I
might have known you would behave well, for you always did behave well,
Winnie. And look here, you must not make yourself unhappy about
everybody as you do. George, for instance: I would be very careful of
what I gave him, if I were you. Let them go out to their own place
again, they will be far better there than here. And don’t give them too
much money: enough to buy a bit of land is quite enough for them; and
when the boys are big enough to help him to work it, he’ll do very
well.” This prudent advice Tom delivered as he strolled, pausing now and
then at the end of a sentence, towards the door. He was, perhaps, not
very sure that it was advice that would commend itself to Winnie, or
that it came with any force from his mouth; nevertheless he had a sort
of conviction, which was not without reason, that it was sensible
advice. “By the bye,” he added, turning short round and standing in the
half dark in the part of the room which was not illuminated by the
lamp--“by the bye, I suppose you will have to sell Bedloe, before you
can settle with me?”

“Sell Bedloe!” Winifred was startled out of the quiescence with which
she had received Tom’s other proposals. “Why should there be any
occasion to do that, Tom?”

“My dear,” he said, with a sort of amiable impatience, “how ignorant you
are of business! Don’t you see that before you halve everything with me
as you promise, all the property must be realised? I mean to say, if you
don’t understand the word, sold. That is the very first step.”

“Sell Bedloe?” she repeated. “Dear Tom, that is the very last thing my
father would have consented to do. Oh no, I cannot sell Bedloe. He hoped
it was to descend to his children, and his name remain in the county; he
intended”--

“Do you think he intended to preserve the name of the Langtons in the
county, Winnie? You can’t be such a fool as that. And, as I suppose your
children, when you have them, will be Langtons, not Chesters”--

She interrupted him eagerly, her face covered with a painful flush. “I
am going to carry out my father’s will against his will, Tom; and, oh, I
feel sure where he is now he will forgive me. He has heirs of his own
name--I mean them to have Bedloe. Where he is he knows better,” she
said, with emotion; “he will understand, he will not be angry. Bedloe
must be for George.”

Tom came forward close to her, within the light of the lamp, with his
lowering face. “I always knew you were a fool, but not such a fool as
that, Winnie. Bedloe for George! a fellow that has disgraced his family,
marrying a woman that--why, even Hopkins is better than she is; they
wouldn’t have her at table in the housekeeper’s room. I thought you were
a lady yourself, I thought you knew--why, Bedloe, Winnie!” he seized her
by the arm; “if you do this you will show yourself an utter idiot,
without any common sense, not to be trusted. If you don’t sell Bedloe,
how are you to pay me?” he cried, with an honest conviction that in
saying this righteous indignation had reached its climax, and there was
nothing more to add.

“Tom,” said Winifred, “leave me for to-night. I am not capable of
anything more to-night. Don’t you feel some pity for me,” she cried,
“left alone with no one to help me?”

But how was he to understand this cry which escaped from her without any
will of hers?

“To help you? whom do you want to help you? I should have helped you if
you had shown any sense. Bedloe to George! Then it is the half of the
_money_ only that is to be for me? Oh, thank you for nothing, Miss
Winnie, if you think I am to be put off with that. Look here! I came to
you thinking you meant well, to show you a way out of it. But I’ve got a
true respect for the governor’s will, if no one else has. Don’t you know
that for years and years he had cut George out of it altogether, and
that it was just Bedloe--Bedloe above everything--that he was not to
have?”

Winifred shrank and trembled as if it were she who was the criminal.
“Yes,” she said almost under her breath, “I know; but, Tom, think. He
is the eldest, he has children who have done no wrong.”

“I don’t think anything about it,” said Tom. “The governor cut him out;
and what reason have you got for giving him what was taken from him?
What can you say for yourself? that’s what I want to know.”

“Tom,” said Winifred, trembling, with tears in her eyes, “there are the
children: little George, who is called after my father, who is the real
heir. His heart would have melted, I am sure it would, if he had seen
the children.”

“Oh, the children! that woman’s children, and the image of her! Can’t
you find a better reason than that?”

“Tom,” said Winifred again, “my father is dead, he can see things now in
a different light. Oh, what is everything on the earth, poor bits of
property and pride, in comparison with right and justice? Do you think
_they_ don’t know better and wish if they could to remedy what has been
wrong here?”

“I don’t know what you mean by _they_,” said Tom sullenly. “If you mean
the governor, we don’t know anything about him; whether--whether it’s
all right, you know, or if”--Here he paused for an appropriate word,
but, not finding one, cried out, as with an intention of cutting short
the subject, “That’s all rubbish! I’ll tell you what I’ll do. If you go
on with this folly, to drag the governor’s name through the mud, by
Jove! I’ll tell Babington. I’ll put him up to what you’re after. Against
my own interest? What do I care? I’ll tell Babington, by Jove! to spite
you if nothing more!”

“I think you will kill me!” cried Winifred, at the end of her patience;
“and that would be the easiest of all, for you would be my heirs, George
and you.”

He stared at her for a moment as if weighing the suggestion, then,
saying resentfully, “Always George,” turned and left her, shutting the
door violently behind him. The noise echoed through the house, which was
all silent and asleep, and Winifred, very lonely, deserted on all sides,
leaned back in her chair and cried to herself silently, in prostration
of misery and weakness. What was she to do? to whom was she to turn? She
had nobody to stand by her. There was nothing but a blank and silence on
every side wherever she could turn.




CHAPTER XVIII


This interview did not calm the nerves of the agitated girl or bring her
soothing or sleep. It was almost morning before the calm of exhaustion
came, hushing the thoughts in her troubled brain and the pulses in her
tired body. She slept without comfort, almost without unconsciousness,
carrying her cares along with her, and when she awoke suddenly to an
unusual sound by her bedside, could scarcely make up her mind that she
had been asleep at all, and believed at first that the little babbling
voice close to her ear was part of a feverish dream. She started up in
her bed, and saw on the carpet close to her the little three-year-old
boy, a small, square figure with very large wide-open blue eyes, who was
altogether new to her experiences, and whom she only identified after a
moment’s astonished consideration as little George, her brother’s child.
The first clear idea that flashed across her mind was that, as Tom said,
he was “the image of his mother,” not a Chester at all, or like any of
her family, but the picture, in little, of the very overblown beauty of
George’s wife. This sensation checked in Winifred’s mind, mechanically,
without any will of hers, the natural impulse of tenderness towards the
child, who, staring at her with his round eyes, had been making
ineffectual pulls at the counterpane, and calling at intervals, “Auntie
Winnie!” in a frightened and reluctant tone. Little George had “got on”
very well with his newly-found relative on the night of his arrival, but
to see an unknown lady in bed, with long hair framing her pale face,
and that look of sleep which simulates death, had much disturbed the
little boy. He fulfilled his _consigne_ with much faltering bravery, but
he did not like it; and when the white lady with the brown hair started
up suddenly, he recoiled with a cry which was very nearly a wail. She
recovered and came to herself sooner than he did, and, smiling, held out
a hand to him.

“Little George, is it you? Come, then, and tell me what it is,” she
said.

Here the baby recoiled a step farther, and stared with still larger
eyes, his mouth open ready to cry again, the tears rising, his little
person drawn together with that instinctive dread of some attack which
seems natural to the helpless. Winnie stretched out her arm to him with
a smile of invitation.

“Come to me, little man, come to me,” she cried. Tears came to her eyes
too, and a softening to her heart. The little creature belonged to her
after a fashion; he was her own flesh and blood; he was innocent, not
struggling for gain. She did not ask how he came there, nor notice the
straying of his eyes to something behind, which inspired yet terrified
him. She was too glad to feel the unaccustomed sensation of pleasure
loosen her bonds. “It is true I am your Aunt Winnie. Come, Georgie,
don’t be afraid of me. Come, for I love you,” she said.

Half attracted, half forced by the influence behind, which was to Winnie
invisible, the child made a shy step towards the bed. “Oo send Georgie
away,” he stammered. “Oo send Georgie back to big ship. Mamma ky.
Georgie no like big ship.”

“Come and tell me, Georgie.” She leant towards him, holding out arms in
which the child saw a refuge from the imperative signs which were being
addressed to him from behind the bed. He came forward slowly with his
little tottering steps, his big eyes full of inquiry, wonder, and
suspicion.

“Oo take care of Georgie?” he said, with a little whimper that went to
Winifred’s heart; then suffered himself to be drawn into her arms. The
touch of the infant was like balm to her.

“Yes, dear,” she cried, with tears in her eyes; “as far as I can, and
with all my heart I will take care of Georgie.” It was a vow made, not
to the infant, who had no comprehension, but to Heaven and her own
heart.

But there was some one else who heard and understood after her fashion.
As Winifred said these words with a fervour beyond description, a sudden
running fire of sobs broke forth behind the head of her bed. Then with a
rush and sweep something heavy and soft fell down by her side, almost
crushing Georgie, who began to cry with fright and wonder.

“Oh, Miss Winnie! God bless you! I knew that was what you would say,”
cried Mrs. George, clasping Winifred’s arm with both her hands, and
laying down her wet, soft cheek upon it. “_He_ thought not; he said we
should have to go back again in that dreadful ship; but oh, bless you! I
knew you weren’t one of that kind!”

“Is it you, Mrs. George?” said Winifred faintly. The sudden apparition
of the mother gave her a shock; and she began to perceive that the
little scene was melodramatic, got up to excite her feelings. She drew
back a little coldly; but the baby gazing at her between his bursts of
crying, and pressing closer and closer to her shoulder, frightened by
his mother’s onslaught, was no actor. She began to feel after a moment
that the mother herself, crying volubly like a schoolgirl, and
clutching her arm as if it were that of a giant, was, if an actor so
very simple an actor, with devices so transparent and an object so
little concealed, that moral indignation was completely misplaced
against her artless wiles, and that nature was far stronger in her than
guile. In the first revulsion she spoke coldly; but after a moment, with
a truer insight, “Stand up,” she said. “Don’t cry so. Get a chair and
come and sit by me. You must not go on your knees to me.”

“Oh, but that I will,” cried Mrs. George, “as if you were the Queen,
Miss Winnie; for you have got our lives in your hands. Look at that poor
little fellow, who is your own flesh and blood. Oh, will you listen to
what worldly folks say, and send him away to be brought up as if he was
nobody, and him your own nephew and just heir?--oh, I don’t mean that!
It appears he’s got no rights, though I always thought--the eldest son’s
eldest son! But no; I don’t say that. George pleased himself marrying
me, and if he lost his place for that, ain’t it more than ever my duty
to do what I can for him? And I don’t make no claim. I don’t talk about
rights. You’ve got the right, Miss Winnie, and there’s an end of it.
Whoever opposes, it will never be George and me. But oh,” cried the
young woman, rising from her knees, and addressing to Winifred all the
simple eloquence of her soft face, her blue eyes blurred with tears,
which flowed in half a dozen channels over the rosy undefined outline of
her cheeks,--“oh, if you only knew what life was in foreign parts! It
don’t suit George. He was brought up a gentleman, and he can’t abear
common ways. And the children!--oh, Miss Winnie, the little boys! Would
you stand by and see them brought up to hold horses and to run
errands--them that are your own flesh and blood?”

Little Georgie had ceased to whimper. The sight of his mother’s crying
overawed the baby. He was too safe and secure in Winifred’s arms to move
at once--but, reflecting in his infant soul, with his big eyes turned to
his mother all the while she spoke, was at last touched beyond his
childish capacity of endurance, forsook the haven in which he had found
shelter, and, flinging his arms about her knees, cried out, “Mamma,
don’t ky, mamma, me love you!” burying his face in the folds of her
dress. Mrs. George stooped down and gathered him up in her arms with a
sleight of hand natural to mothers, and then, child and all,
precipitated herself once more on the carpet at the bedside.

Winifred, too, was carried out of herself by this little scene. She
dried the fast-flowing tears from the soft face so near to her as if
the young mother had been no more serious an agent than Georgie. “You
shall not go back. You shall want nothing that I can do for you,” she
cried, soothing them. It was some time before the tumult calmed; but
when at last the fit of crying was over, Mrs. George began at once to
smile again, with an easy turn from despair to satisfaction. She held
her child for Winifred to kiss, her own lips trembling between joy and
trouble.

“I don’t ask you to kiss me, for I’m not good enough for you to kiss;
but Georgie--he is your own flesh and blood.”

“Do not say so,” said Winifred, kissing mother and child. “And now sit
beside me and talk to me, and do not call me miss, for I am your sister.
I am sure you have been a good wife to George.”

“I should be that and more: since he lost his fortune, and his ’ome, and
all, for me,” she cried.

The scene which ensued was the most unexpected of all. Mrs. George
placed the child upon Winifred’s bed and began, without further ado, a
baby game of peeps and transparent hidings, her excitement turning to
laughter, as it had turned to tears. Winifred, too, though her heart was
heavy enough, found herself drawn into that sudden revulsion. They
played with little Georgie for half an hour in the middle of all the
care and pain that surrounded them, the one woman with her heart
breaking, the other feeling, as far as she could feel anything, that the
very life of her family hung in the balance--moving the child to peals
of laughter, in which they shared after their fashion, as women only
can, interposing this episode of play into the gravest crisis. It was
only when Georgie’s laughter began to show signs of that over-excitement
that leads to tears, that Winifred suddenly said, almost to herself,
“But how am I to do it? how am I to do it?” with an accent of weary
effort which almost reached the length of despair.

“Oh dear! you that are so good and kind,” cried Mrs. George, changing
also in a moment, “just let us stay with you, dear Winnie--it’s a
liberty to call you Winnie; but oh dear, dear! why can’t we just live
all together? That would do nobody any harm. That would go against no
one’s will. It wasn’t said you were not to give me and George and the
children an ’ome. Oh, only think! it’s such a big, big house! If you
didn’t like the noise of the children,--but you aren’t one of that sort,
not to like the noise of the children, and so I told George,--they could
have their nursery where you would never hear a sound. And George would
be a deal of use to you in managing the estate, and I would do the
housekeeping, and welcome, and save you any trouble. And why, why--oh,
why shouldn’t we just settle down all together, and be, oh, so
comfortable, Miss Winnie, dear?”

This suggestion, it need scarcely be said, struck Winifred with dismay.
The face, no longer weeping, no longer elevated by the passionate
earnestness of the first appeal, dropping to calculations which,
perhaps, were more congenial to its nature, gave her a chill of
repulsion while still her heart was soft. She seemed to see, with a
curious second sight, the scene of family life, of family tragedy, which
might ensue were this impossible plan attempted. It was with difficulty
that she stopped Mrs. George, who, in the heat of success, would have
settled all the details at once, and it was only the entrance of Miss
Farrell, tenderly anxious about her pupil’s health, and astounded to
find Mrs. George and her child established in her room, that finally
delivered poor Winnie.

“You would have no need of strangers eating you up if you had us,” her
sister-in-law said, as she stooped to kiss her ostentatiously, and held
the child up to repeat the salute ere she went away.

Winifred had kissed the young mother almost with emotion in the midst of
her pleading; but somehow this return of the embrace gave a slight shock
both to her delicacy and pride. She laughed a little and coloured when
Miss Farrell, after the door closed, looked at her astonished. “You
think I have grown into wonderful intimacy with Mrs. George?” she said.

“I do indeed, Winnie. My dear, I would not interfere, but you must not
let your kind heart carry you too far.”

“Oh, my kind heart!” cried the girl, feeling a desperate irony in the
words. “She suggests that they should live with me,” she added, turning
her head away.

“Live with you? Winnie! my dear!” Miss Farrell gasped, with a sharp
break between each word.

“She thinks it will arrange itself so, quite simply--oh, it is quite
simple! Dear Miss Farrell, don’t say anything. I have been pushing it
off. I have been pretending to be ill because I was miserable. Let me
get up now--and don’t say anything,” she added after a moment, with lips
that trembled in spite of herself. “There are no--letters; no one--has
been here?”

“Nothing, Winnie.” Her friend did not look at her; she dared not betray
her too profound sympathy, her personal anguish, even by a kiss.

When Winifred came downstairs she found Mr. Babington waiting for her.
He was a very old acquaintance, whom she had not been used to think of
as a friend; but trouble makes strange changes in the aspect of things
around us, turning sometimes those whom we have loved most into
strangers, and lighting up faces that have been indifferent to us with
new lights of compassion and sympathy. Mr. Babington’s formal manner,
his well-known features, so composed and commonplace, his grey, keen
eyes under their bushy eyebrows, suddenly took a new appearance to
Winifred. They seemed to shine upon her with the warmth of ancient
friendship. She had known him all her life, yet, it seemed, had never
known him till to-day. He came to meet her, holding out his hand, with
some kind, ordinary questions about her health, but all the while a
light put out, as it were, at the windows of his soul, to help her,
another poor soul stumbling along in the darkness. It was not anything
that he said, nor that she said. She did not ask for any help, nor he
offer it; and yet in a moment Winifred felt herself, in her mind,
clinging to him with the sense that here was an old, old friend,
somebody, above all doubt and uncertainty, in whom she could trust.

“Miss Winifred,” he said, “I am afraid, though you don’t seem much like
it, that we must talk of business.”

“Yes; I wish it, Mr. Babington. I am only foolish and troubled--not ill
at all.”

“I am not so sure about that; but still--Your brother Tom has been
warning me, Miss Winifred--I hope to save you from a false step; that
you are thinking of--going against your father’s will”--

“Did Tom tell you so, Mr. Babington?”

“He did. I confess that I was not surprised. I have expected you to do
so all along; but so fine a fortune as you have got is not to be lightly
parted with, my dear young lady. Think of all the power it gives you,
power to do good, to increase the happiness, or at least the comfort,
perhaps of hundreds of people. If it was in your brothers’ hands, do you
think it would be used as well? We must think of that, Miss Winifred, we
must think of that.”

“If it was in my power,” she said, looking at him wistfully, “I should
think rather of what is just. Can anything be good that is founded upon
injustice? Oh, Mr. Babington, put yourself in my place! Could you bear
to take away from your brother, from any one, what was his by nature--to
put yourself in his seat, to take it from him, to rob him?”

“Hush, hush, my dear girl! I am afraid I have not a conscience so
delicate as yours. I could bear a great deal which does not seem
bearable to you. And you must remember it is no doing of yours. Your
father thought, and I agree with him, that you would make a better use
of his money, and do more credit to his name, than either of your
brothers. It throws a fearful responsibility upon you, we may allow;
but still, my dear Miss Winifred”--

“Mr. Babington,” she cried, interrupting him, “you are my oldest
friend--oh yes, my oldest friend! You know, if I am forced to do this,
it will only be deceiving from beginning to end. I will only pretend to
obey. I will be trying all the time, as I am now, to find out ways of
defeating all his purposes, and doing--what he said I was not to do!”

Her eyes shone almost wildly through the tears that stood in them. She
changed colour from pale to red, from red to pale; her weakness gave her
the guise of impassioned strength.

“Miss Winifred,” said the lawyer very gravely, “do you know that you are
guilty of the last imprudence in saying this, of all people in the
world, to me?”

“Oh,” she cried, “you are my friend, my old friend! I never remember the
time when I did not know you. It is not imprudent, it is my only hope.
Think a little of me first, whom you knew long before this will was
made. Tell me how I can get out of the bondage of it. Teach me, teach me
how to cheat everybody, for that is all that is left to me! how to keep
it from them so as best to give it to them. Teach me! for there is no
one I can ask but you.”

The lawyer looked at her with a very serious face. Her great emotion,
her trembling earnestness, the very force of her appeal, as of one
consulting her only oracle, hurt the good man with a sympathetic pain.
“My dear,” he said, “God forbid I should refuse you my advice, or
misunderstand you, you who are far too good for any of them. But, Miss
Winifred, think again, my dear. Are you altogether a free agent? Is
there not some one else who has a right to be consulted before you take
a step--which may change the whole course of your life?”

Winifred grew so pale that he thought she was going to faint, and got up
hurriedly to ring the bell. She stopped him with a movement of her hand.
Then she said firmly, “There is no one; no one can come between me and
my duty. I will consult nobody--but you.”

“My dear young lady, excuse me if I speak too plainly; but want of
confidence between two people that are in the position of”--

“You mean,” she said faintly yet steadily, “Dr. Langton? Mr. Babington,
he has no duty towards George and Tom. I love them--how can I help it?
they are my brothers; but he--why should he love them? I don’t expect
it--I can’t expect it. I must settle this by myself.”

“And yet he will be the one to suffer,” said the lawyer reflectively in
a parenthesis. “My dear Miss Winifred, take a little time to think it
over, there is no cause for hurry; take a week, take another day. Think
a little”--

“I have done nothing but think,” she said, “since you told me first.
Thinking kills me, I cannot go on with it; and you can’t tell--oh, you
can’t tell how it harms _them_, what it makes them do and say!
Tom”--(here her voice was stifled by the rising sob in her throat) “and
all of them,” she cried hastily. “Oh, tell me how to be done with it, to
settle it so that there shall be no more thinking, no more struggling!”
She clasped her hands with a pathetic entreaty, and looked imploringly
at him. And she bore in her face the signs of the struggle which she
pleaded to be freed from. Her face had the parched and feverish look of
anxiety, its young, soft outline had grown pinched and hollow, and all
the cheerful glow of health had faded. The lawyer looked at her with
genuine tenderness and pity.

“My poor child,” he said, “one can very well see that this great
fortune, which your poor father believed was to make you happy, has
brought anything but happiness to you.”

She gave him a little pathetic smile, and shook her head; but she was
not able to speak.

“Then, Miss Winifred,” he said cheerfully, “since you are certain that
you don’t want it, and won’t have it, and have made up your mind to do
nothing but scheme and plot to frustrate the will, even when you are
seeming to obey it,--I think I know a better way. Write down what you
mean to do with the property, and leave the rest to me.”

She looked at him, roused by his words, with an awakening thrill of
wonder. “Write down--what I mean to do? But that will make me helpless
to do it; that will risk everything; or so you said.”

“I said true. Nevertheless, if you are sure you wish, at the bottom of
your heart, to sacrifice yourself to your brothers”--

She shook her head half angrily, with a gesture of impatience. “To give
them back their rights.”

“That means the same thing in your phraseology. If that is what you
really wish, do what I say, and leave the rest to me.”

She looked at him for a moment, bewildered, then rose up hastily and
flew to the writing-table. How easy it was to do it! how blessed if only
it were possible to throw this weight once for all off her shoulders,
and be free!




CHAPTER XIX


This was in the morning, and nothing further happened until the
afternoon. Winifred, though she was tremulous with weakness, had her
pony carriage brought round, and went out, taking Miss Farrell with her.
They went sometimes slowly, sometimes like the wind, as their
conversation flagged or came to a point of interest. They had much to
say to each other, and argued over and over again the same question.
They went round and round the park, and along a bit of road between the
Brentwood gate and the one that was called the Hollyport. Winifred’s
ponies seemed to take that way without any will of hers. Was it without
her will? But, if not, it was quite ineffectual. The long road stretched
white on either side, disappearing here and there round the corner of
the woods; but there was no one visible, one way or the other--no one
whom the ladies wished to see. Once, indeed, as they approached the
farthest gate on their return, some one riding quickly, at a pace only
habitual to one person they knew, appeared on the brow of the Brentwood
hill coming towards them. The reins shook in Winifred’s hands. She let
her ponies fall into a walk, not so much of set purpose as because her
wrists had lost all power; and the reins lay on the necks of the little
pair, who, like other pampered servants, did no more work than they were
obliged to do. The horseman came steadily down the hill, and disappeared
in the hollow, from which he would naturally reappear again and meet
them before many minutes. But he did not reappear. The ladies lingered,
the ponies took advantage of the moment of weakness to draw aside to the
edge of the road and munch grass, as if they were uncertain of their
daily corn. But no one came by that way. They had not said anything to
each other, nor had either said a word to show that she was aware of any
meaning in this pause. When, however, there was no disguising that it
was futile, Winifred said, almost under her breath, “He must have gone
round by the other way.”

“I heard there was some one ill at the Manor Farm,” said Miss Farrell,
with a quick catching of her breath.

“That will be the reason,” Winifred said, with a dreary calm, and she
said no more, nor was any name mentioned between them as they drove
quietly home. Old Hopkins came out to the steps as she gave the groom
the reins.

“If you please, Miss Winifred, Mr. Babington has been asking for you.
He said, would you please step into the library as soon as you came
back. The gentlemen,” Hopkins added after a pause, with much gravity,
“is both there.”

“Will you come, Miss Farrell?” Winifred said.

“If I could be of any use to you, my darling; but I could not, and you
would rather that no one was there.”

“Perhaps,” said Winifred, with a sigh. Yet it was forlorn to see her in
her deep mourning, walking slowly in her weakness, alone and deserted,
though with so much depending on her. She went into the library without
even taking off her hat. Mr. Babington was seated there at what had been
her father’s writing-table, and Tom and George were both with him. Tom
stood before the fire, with that air of assumption which he had never
put off--the rightful-heir aspect, determined to stand upon his rights.
George had his wife with him as usual, and sat with her whispering and
consulting at the other end of the room. Mr. Babington had been writing;
he had a number of papers before him, but evidently, from the silence,
only broken by the undertones of George and his wife, which prevailed,
had put off all explanations until Winifred was present. Neither of the
brothers stirred when she entered. George had forgotten, in the
composure of a husband whose wife requires none of the delicacies of
politeness from him, those civilities which men in other circumstances
instinctively pay to women, and Tom was too much out of temper and too
deeply opposed to his sister to show her any attention. Mr. Babington
rose and gave her a chair.

“Sit here, Miss Winifred. I shall want to place various things very
clearly before you,” he said. “Now, will you all give me your
attention?” His voice subdued Mrs. George, who had sprung up to go to
her sister-in-law with a beaming smile of familiarity. She fell back
with a little alarm into her chair at her husband’s side.

“You are all aware of the state of affairs up to this point,” Mr.
Babington said. “Your father’s large fortune, left in succession, first
to one and then to the other of his sons, to be withdrawn from both as
they in turn displeased him, has been finally left to Miss Winifred,
whom he thought the most likely of his three children to do him credit
and spend his money fitly. Exception may be taken to what he did, but
none, in my opinion, to the reason. He thought of that more than
anything else, and he chose what seemed to him the best means to have
what he wanted.”

“He must have been off his head; I shall never believe anything else,
though there may not be enough evidence,” Tom said.

“I daresay my father was right,” said George in his despondent voice.

“I think, from his point of view, your father was quite right; but there
are many things that men, when they make their wills, don’t take into
consideration. They think, for one thing, that their heirs will feel as
they do, and that they have an absolute power to make themselves obeyed.
This, unfortunately, they very often fail to do. Miss Winifred becomes
heir under a condition with which she refuses to comply.”

“Mr. Babington!” Winifred said, putting her hand on his arm.

“You may trust to me, my dear. The condition is, that she is not, under
any circumstances, to share the property with her brothers, or to
interfere in any way with the testator’s arrangements for them. This she
refuses to do.”

“Don’t be a fool, Winnie!” cried Tom. “Pass over that, please. We all
know what you mean, and that she’s to pose as our benefactor, and to
receive our eternal gratitude, and so forth.”

“I think it would be a great pity if Winnie took any rash step,” George
said.

Mr. Babington looked round upon them with a smile. “She wishes,” he
said, “to give the landed property, Bedloe, to her brother George, and
to make up an equivalent to it in money for Mr. Tom there. These are the
arrangements she proposes to me--the sole executor, you will observe,
charged to carry your father’s will into effect.” He took up one of the
papers as he spoke, and with a smile, caught in his own the hand which
she once more tremulously put forth to interrupt him. “Here is the
proposal written in her own hand,” he said. “Miss Winifred, you must
trust to me; I am acting for the best. Naturally this puts an end to
her, as her father’s heir.”

Here there arose a confused tumult round the little group in the middle
of the room. Mrs. George was the first to make herself heard. She burst
forth into sobs and tears.

“Oh! after all she’s promised to do for us! after all she’s said for the
children! Oh, George! go and do something, stand up for your sister.
Don’t let it be robbed away from her, after all she’s promised. Oh,
George! Oh, Miss Winnie! remember what you’ve promised!--and what is to
become of Georgie?” the young mother cried.

“Mr. Babington,” said George, “I don’t think it’s right to take
advantage of my sister because she’s foolish and generous. Who is it to
go to if you take it from her? Let one of us at least have the good of
it. I don’t want her to give me Bedloe. She could be of use to us
without that.”

Tom had burst into a violent laugh of despite and despair. “If that’s
what it’s to come to,” he said, “we’ll go to law all of us. Winnie too,
by Jove! No one can say we’re not a united family now.”

Winifred sat with her eyes fixed on the old lawyer’s face. She said
nothing, and if there was a tremor in her heart too, did not express it,
though already there began to arise dull whispers--Ought she to have
done it? Was it her duty? Was this in reality the way to serve them
best?

“The law is open to whoever seeks its aid--when they have plenty of
money,” said Mr. Babington quickly. “You ask a very pertinent question,
Mr. George. It is one which never has been put to me before by any of
the persons most concerned.”

This statement fell among them with a thrill like an electric shock. It
silenced Tom’s nervous laughter and Mrs. George’s sobs. They
instinctively drew near with a bewildering expectation, although they
knew not what their expectation was.

“Mr. Chester,” said the lawyer, “like most men, thought he had plenty of
time before him, and he did not understand much about the law. I am
bound to add that in this particular he got little information from me;
and the consequence was that he forgot, in God’s providence, to assign
any heirs, failing Miss Winifred. It was a disgrace to my office to let
such a document go out of it,” he added, with a twinkle in his eyes,
“but so it was. He thought perhaps that he would live for ever, or that
at least he’d see his daughter’s children, or that she would do
implicitly what he told her, or something else as silly--begging your
pardon; all men are foolish where wills are concerned.”

There was another pause. Mr. Babington leant back in his chair, so much
at his ease and leisure, that he looked like a benevolent grandfather
discoursing to his children round him. They surrounded him, a group of
silent and anxious faces. Tom was the one who thought he knew the most.
He asked, with a voice which sounded parched in his throat, moistening
his lips to get the words out, “Who gets the property, then?” bringing
out the question with a rush.

Mr. Babington turned his back upon Tom. He addressed himself to George,
whose face had no prevision in it, but was only dully, quietly anxious,
as was habitual to him. George knew little about the law. He was not in
the way of expecting much. Whatever new thing might come, it was in all
likelihood a little worse than the old. He was vexed and grieved that
Winnie, who certainly would have been kind to him and his children, was
not to have the money; but he had not an idea in his mind as to what,
failing her, its destination would be.

“Mr. George Chester,” he said, “you are the eldest son; your father, I
suppose, had his reasons for cutting you out, but those reasons I hope
don’t exist now. As your sister refuses to accept the condition under
which the property comes to her, and as your father made no provision
for such a contingency, it follows that the will is not worth the paper
it is written on, and that Mr. Chester as good as died intestate, if you
know what that means.”

Tom, who had been listening intently over Mr. Babington’s shoulder,
threw up his clenched hands with a loud exclamation. Into George’s blank
face there crept a tremor as of light coming. Winifred and Mrs. George
sat unmoved except by curiosity and wonder, unenlightened, trying to
read, as women do, the meaning in the face of the speaker, but
uninformed by the words.

“If I know what that means? Intestate? I don’t think I do know what it
means.”

“You fool!” his brother cried.

“It means,” said Mr. Babington, “a kind of natural justice more or less,
at least in the present circumstances. When a man dies intestate, his
landed property (I’ll spare you law terms) goes without question to his
eldest son--which you are--and natural representative. The personalty,
that is the money, you know, is divided. Do you understand now what I
mean? The personal property is far more than the real in this case, so
it will make a very just and equal division. And now, Miss Winnie, tell
me if I have not managed well for you? Are you satisfied now to have
trusted yourself to your old friend?”

“George, George! I don’t understand. What’s to be divided? What do we
get?” cried Mrs. George, standing up, the tears only half dried in her
eyes, her rose tints coming back to her face.

George was so startled and overwhelmed by information which entered but
slowly into an intelligence confused by ill-fortune, that for the moment
he made his wife no reply; but Tom did, who had already fully savoured
all the sweets and bitters of this astounding change of affairs.

“Mrs. Chester,” he said, with an ironical bow, “you get Bedloe, my
father’s place, that he never would have let you set foot in, if he
could have helped it, poor old governor. And the rest of us get--our
due; oh yes, we get our due. I know I was a fool and didn’t keep his
favour when I had got it; and you, Winnie, you traitor, oh, you traitor!
There isn’t a female for the word, is there? it should be female
altogether. You that he put his last trust in, poor old governor! you’ve
served him out the best of any of us,” said Tom, with a burst of violent
laughter, “and there’s an end of him and all his schemes!” he cried.

Winifred rose up tremulous. There was perhaps in her heart too an echo
of Tom’s rage and sense of wrong. This woman, the reverse of all that
her father’s ambition (vulgar ambition, yet so strong) had hoped for, to
be the mistress of the house! And Bedloe, which Winnie loved, to pass
away to a family which had rubbed off and forgotten even the little
gloss of artificial polish which Mr. Chester had procured for his sons.
She would have given it to them had the power been in her hands, she had
always intended it, never from the first moment meant anything else. And
yet when all was thus arranged according to her wish, above her hopes,
Winifred felt, to the bottom of her heart, that to give up her home to
Mrs. George was a thing not to be accomplished without a thrill of
indignation, a sense of wrong. And the very relief which filled her soul
brought back to her those individual miseries which this blessed
decision (for it was a blessed decision though cruel) could not take
away. She made Tom no reply. She scarcely returned the pressure of Mr.
Babington’s kind hand. She said not a word to the agitated, triumphant,
yet astonished pair, who could not yet understand what good fortune had
happened to them. She went straight out of the library to Miss Farrell’s
room. She still wore her hat and outdoor dress. She took her old
friend’s hand, and drew her out of the chair in which she had been
seated, watching for every opening of the door. “Come,” she said, “come
away.”

“What has happened, Winnie? What has happened?”

“Everything that is best. George has got Bedloe. It is all right, all
right, better than any one could have hoped. And I shall not sleep
another night under this roof. Dear Miss Farrell, if you love me, come
away, come away!”




CHAPTER XX


Edward Langton had never meant to forsake his love. He intended no more
to give her up because she did not agree with him, because he thought
her mistaken, or even because she had rejected his guidance and wounded
his pride, than he meant to give up his life. But he had been very
deeply wounded by her acceptance of his withdrawal at that critical
moment. She had not chosen to put him, her natural defender, between her
brothers and herself. She had refused, so his thoughts went on to say,
his intervention. She had preferred to keep her interests separate from
his, to give him no share in what might be the most important act of
her life. He would not believe it possible when he left her. As he
crossed the hall and hurried down the avenue, he thought every moment
that he heard some one, a messenger hastening after him to bring him
back. But there was no such messenger. He expected next morning a letter
of explanation, of apology, at least of invitation imploring him not to
forsake her--but there was none. While Winifred’s heart sank lower and
lower at the absence of any communication from him, he was waiting with
a mingled sense of dismay, astonishment, and indignation for something
from her. It seemed incredible to him that she should not write to
soothe away his offence, to explain herself. His first sensation indeed
had been that the offence given to him was deadly and not to be
explained, and that she who would not have him to help her in her
trouble, could not want him in her life; but before the next morning
came he had reasoned himself into a certainty that he should have as
full an explanation as it was possible to make, that she would excuse
herself by means of a hundred arguments which his own reason suggested
to him, and call him to her with every persuasion of love. But nothing
of the kind took place--Winifred, sick and miserable, awaited on her
side the letter, the inquiry which never came, and felt herself forsaken
at the moment when every generous heart, she thought, must have felt how
much she needed support and sympathy. She did not want his interference;
she had been able to manage her family business--to do without him; he
had been _de trop_ between her brothers and herself. Then let it be so!
he said at last to himself, and plunged into his work, riding hither and
thither, visiting even patients who needed him no longer, to prove to
himself that he was too much and too seriously offended to care. To be
sure, he was not the man to stand cap in hand and plead for her favour.

He went over all the district in those three days, dashing along the
roads, hurrying from one hamlet to another. It was not the life he had
been so foolish as to imagine to himself, the life--he felt himself
blush hotly at the recollection--of the master of Bedloe, restoring the
prestige of the old name, changing the aspect of the district,
ameliorating everything as only (he thought) a man who was born the
friend and master of the place could do. It had been an ideal life which
he had imagined for himself, not one of selfishness. He had meant to
brighten the very face of the country, to mend everything that needed
mending, to do good to the poor people, who were his own people. He
remembered now that there were those who thought it humiliating and base
for a man to be enriched by his wife, and the subtle contempt of women
embodied in that popular prejudice rose up in hot and painful shame to
his heart and his face. A man is never so sure that women are inferior,
as when a woman has neglected or played him false. Edward Langton’s
heart was very sore, but he began to say to himself that it served him
right for his meanness in depending on a woman, and that a man ought to
be indebted to his own exertions and not look for advancement in so
humiliating a way. These thoughts grew more and more bitter as the days
went on. He flung himself into his work: an epidemic would have pleased
him better than the mild little ailments or lingering chronic diseases
which were the only visitations known among those healthy country folk;
but such as they were he made the most of them, frightening the sick
people by the unnecessary energy of his attendance, and saying to
himself that this, and not a fiction of the imagination or anything so
degrading as a wife’s fortune, was his true life. That he flew about the
country without many a lingering unwilling look towards Bedloe, it would
be false to say. His way wherever he went led him past the park gates,
which he found always closed, silent, giving no sign. On the one
occasion when Winifred perceived him descending the hill, by one of
those hazards which continually arise to confuse human affairs, he, for
the moment half-happy in the entrancement of a case which presented
dangerous complications, did not see or recognise the little pony
carriage lingering under the russet trees, and thus missed the only
chance of a meeting and explanation; but he did meet, when that chance
was over, next day, in the afternoon, Mr. Babington driving his heavy
old phaeton from the gates of Bedloe. Langton’s heart gave a leap even
at this means of hearing something of Winnie; but perhaps his pride
would still have prevented any clearing up, had not the old lawyer taken
it into his own hands. He stopped his horse and waited till Edward, who
was walking home from the house of a patient in the village, came up.

“I want to speak to you,” Mr. Babington said. “Will you jump up and come
with me along the road, or will you offer me your hospitality and a bit
of dinner? There is full moon to-night and I don’t mind being late. Oh,
if it’s not convenient, never mind.”

Edward’s pride had made him hesitate--his good breeding came to his aid,
showing it to be inevitable that he should obey the hungry longing of
his heart.

“Certainly it is convenient, and I am too glad--drive on to my house,
and I shall be with you in a moment.”

Though he had felt it to be his only salvation to hold fast by his
profession and present tenor of existence, Langton’s heart beat loud as
he hurried on. Now, he said to himself, he should know what it meant,
now he should have some light thrown upon the position at least which
Winifred had assumed.

Mr. Babington, however, ate his dinner, which was simple and not
over-abundant, having been prepared for the doctor alone, with steady
composure, and it was only when the meal was over that he opened out.
Langton had apologised, as was inevitable, for the simple fare.

“Don’t say a word,” said the lawyer, with a wave of his hand. “It was
all excellent, and I’m glad to see you’ve such a good cook. You don’t
know what a comfort it is to come out of a confused house like _that_,
with lengthy fine dinners that nobody understands, to a comfortable chop
which a man can enjoy and which it is a pleasure to see.”

“Bedloe was not a confused house in former days,” said Langton, with a
feeling that Winifred’s credit was somehow assailed.

“Ah, nothing is as it was in former days,” said Mr. Babington, shaking
his head; “everything is topsy-turvy now. I suppose you know all about
the last turn the affair has taken. I wonder you were not there, though,
to support poor Miss Winifred, poor thing, who has had a great deal to
go through.”

“You will be surprised,” said Langton, forcing a somewhat pale smile,
“if I tell you that I don’t know anything about it. Miss Chester
preferred that the question between her brothers and herself should be
settled among themselves. And perhaps she was right.”

“My dear Langton,” said Mr. Babington, laying his hand on the young
man’s arm, “I hope there’s no coolness on this account between that poor
girl and you?”

“I see no reason why she should be called a poor girl,” Langton said
quickly.

“Ah, well, you have not seen her then during the last two or three days.
Poor thing! between making the best of these fellows, and struggling to
keep up a show of following her father’s directions--between acting
false and meaning true”--

“Mr. Babington,” said Langton, with a dryness in his throat, “unhappily,
as you say, there has been--no coolness, thank Heaven--but a little--a
momentary silence between Miss Chester and me. Perhaps I have been to
blame. I thought she--Tell me what has happened, and how everything is
settled, for pity’s sake!”

“Yes,” said the old lawyer, “I haven’t the slightest doubt, my young
friend, that you have been to blame. That is why the poor child looked
so white and pathetic when she said to me that she had no one to
consult. When you come to have girls of your own,” Mr. Babington said
somewhat severely, “you’ll know how it feels to see a little young
creature you are fond of look like that.”

Heaven and earth! as if all the old fogeys in the world, if they had a
thousand daughters, could feel half what a young lover feels! The blood
rose to young Langton’s temples, but he did not trust himself to reply.

“Well,” Mr. Babington continued, “it’s all comfortably settled at the
last. I had my eye on this solution all along. I may say it was my doing
all along, for I carefully refrained from pointing out to him what of
course, in an ordinary way, it would have been my duty to point
out--that in case of Miss Winifred’s refusal there was no after
settlement. You don’t understand our law terms, perhaps? Well, it was
just this, that if she refused to accept, there was no provision for
what was to follow. I knew all along she would never accept to cut out
her brothers--so here we come to a dead stop. He had not prepared for
that contingency. I don’t believe he ever thought of it. She had obeyed
him all her life, and he thought she would obey him after he was dead.
She refused the condition, and here we are in face of a totally
different state of affairs. The other wills were destroyed, and this was
as good as destroyed by her refusal. What is to be done then but to
return to the primitive condition of the matter? He dies intestate, the
property is divided, and everybody, with the exception of that scamp
Tom, is content.”

“I don’t understand,” Langton said: it was true so far, that the words
were like an incoherent murmur in his ears--but even while he spoke, the
meaning came to his mind like a flash of light. He had put aside all
such (as he said to himself) degrading imaginations, and had made up
his mind that his work was his life, and that a country doctor he was,
and should remain; but, all the same, the sensation of knowing that
Bedloe had become unattainable in fact and certainty, not only by the
temporary alienation of a misunderstanding, went through his heart like
a sudden knife.

“I can make you understand in a moment,” said Mr. Babington. “Miss
Winifred made the will void by refusing to fulfil its condition, and no
provision had been made for that emergency; therefore, in fact, it is as
if poor Chester had never made a will at all: in which case the landed
property goes to the eldest son. The personalty is divided. They will
all be very well off,” the lawyer added. “There is nothing to complain
of, though Tom is wild that he is not the heir, and Miss Winifred, poor
girl--she was very anxious to do justice, but when it came to giving
over her house to that pink-and-white creature, much too solid for her
age, George’s wife--Well, it was her own doing; but she could not bear
it, you know. Her going off like that left them all very much confused
and bewildered, but I think on the whole it was the wisest thing she
could do.”

“How going off?” cried Langton, starting to his feet.

“My dear fellow, didn’t you know? Come now, come now,” said the old
lawyer, patting him on the arm, “this is carrying things too far. You
should not have left her when she wanted all the support that was
possible. And she should not have gone away without letting you
know--but poor thing, poor thing! I don’t think she knew whether she was
on her head or her heels. She couldn’t bear it. She just turned and fled
and took no time to think.”

“Turned and fled? Do you mean to say--do you mean to tell me”--The
young man, though he was no weakling, changed colour like a girl: his
sunburnt, manly countenance showed a sudden pallor under the brown,
something rose in his throat. He took a turn about the room in his
sudden excitement, then came back, mastering himself as best he could.
“I beg your pardon; this news is so unexpected, and everything is so
strange. Of course,” he added, forcing himself into composure, “I shall
hear.”

“Yes, of course you’ll hear; but if I were you, I should not wait to
hear, I should insist on knowing, my young friend. Don’t let pride spoil
your whole existence, as I’ve seen some things do with boys and girls.
She is well enough off, to be sure. I wish my girls had the half or
quarter of what she will have; but still it’s a come-down from Bedloe.
And to give it up to Mrs. George, that was harder than she thought. She
thought only of her brothers, you know, till she saw the wife. What the
wife did to disgust her, I can’t tell, but I’ve always noticed that when
there are two women in a case like this, they always feel themselves
pitted against each other, and the men count for nothing with them. As
soon as the thing was done, Miss Winnie forgot her brother: she saw only
Mrs. George, and to give up to her was a bitter pill. She is a good
girl, and meant everything that was good, but Mrs. George is a bitter
pill: when it came to that, she felt that she could not put up with it.
And you were not there, excuse me for reminding you. And she took it
into her head that everything was against her, as girls do--and fled.
That is the worst of girls, they are so hasty. You will know when you
have daughters of your own.”

Thus the good man went on maundering, quite unconscious that his
companion could have risen and slain him every time that he mentioned
those daughters of his own. What had his daughters to do with Winnie?
Mr. Babington talked a great deal more on that and every branch of the
subject, until it seemed to him that it was time “to be driving on,” as
he said. And then Edward had leisure for the first time to contemplate
the situation in which he found himself. Self-reproach, anger,
disappointment, coursed through his veins. He was wroth with the woman
he loved, wroth with himself: one moment attributing to her a desire to
cast him off, a want of confidence in him which it was unendurable to
think of; the next, bitterly blaming his own selfish pride, which had
driven him from her at the moment of her need. The high tide of
conflicting sentiments was so hot within him that he went out to walk
off his excitement, returning, to the consternation of his household, an
hour or more after midnight, the most unhallowed of all promenadings in
the opinion of the country folk. When he got back again to his dim
little surgery and study, returning, as it seemed, to a dull life
deprived of her and of all things, and to the overmastering
consciousness that she was gone from him, perhaps by his own fault, the
young doctor had a moment of despair: then he rose up and struck his
hand upon the table, and laughed aloud at himself. “Bah!” he said to
himself; “nobody disappears at this time of day. What a fool one is! as
if these were the middle ages! Wherever she has gone, she must have left
an address!” He laughed loud and long, though his laugh was not
mirthful, at this bringing down of his despair to the easy possibilities
of modern life. That makes all the difference between tragedy, which is
mediæval, and comedy, which is of our days: though the comedy of common
living involves a great many tragedies in every age, and even in our
own.




CHAPTER XXI


An address is not everything: there must be the will and the power to
write, there must be the letter produced, and the address obtained. The
very first step was hard. To go up to Bedloe and ascertain from the
brother, who was “that cad” to Langton, where Winifred had gone, and
thus betray his ignorance and the separation between them--the idea of
this was such a mortification and annoyance to him as it is difficult to
describe. He could not bear to expose himself to their remarks, to
perhaps their laughter, perhaps, worse still, their pity. A few days
elapsed before he could screw up his courage to this point, and when at
last he did so, his brief and cold note was answered by George in
person, whose dejected aspect bore none of the signs of triumph which
Langton had expected.

“I was coming to ask you,” George said. “My sister went off in such a
hurry she left no address. She left her maid to pack up her things. I
did not even know she was going. It was a great disappointment to my
wife and me. We should have been very glad to have had her to stay with
us until--well, until her own affairs were settled. She would have been
of great use to Alice,” George continued, with an unconscious gravity of
egotism which was almost too simple to be called by that harsh name.
“She could have put my wife up to a great many things: for we haven’t
just been used, you know, to this sort of life, and it is very difficult
to get into all the ways. And then the children were so good with
Winnie, they took to her in a moment. Speaking of that, I wish you would
just come up and look at Georgie. My wife thinks he is quite well, but I
don’t quite like the little fellow’s look,” the anxious father said.

Langton was not mollified by this unexpected invitation. The idea of
becoming medical attendant to George Chester’s children and at the beck
and call of the new household at Bedloe filled him indeed with an
unreasonable exasperation. He explained as coldly as he could that he
did not “go in for” children’s ailments, and recommended Mr. Marlitt, of
Brentwood, who was specially qualified to advise anxious parents. He was
indeed so moved by the sight of the new master of Bedloe, that the
purpose for which George had come was momentarily driven out of his
head. Why it should be a grievance to him that George Chester was master
of Bedloe he could not of course have explained to any one. He had not
been exasperated by George’s father. Disappointment, and the sharper
self-shame with which he could not help remembering his own imaginations
on the matter, joined with the sense of angry scorn with which he beheld
the place which he had meant to fill so well, filled so badly by
another. George thanked him warmly for recommending Dr. Marlitt, “though
I am very sorry, and so will my wife be, that you don’t pay attention to
that branch. Isn’t it a pity? for surely if anything is important, it’s
the children,” he said in all good faith.

It was only after he was gone that Edward reflected that he had obtained
no information. It soothed him a little to think that she had not let
her brother know where she was going. It had been, then, a sudden
impulse of disgust, a hasty step taken in a moment when she felt herself
abandoned. Edward did not forgive her, but yet he was soothed a little,
even though excited and distressed beyond measure by his failure to know
where she was. A day or two passed in the lethargy of this
disappointment and perplexity as to what to do next. Then he thought of
Mr. Babington. He wrote immediately to the old lawyer, begging him to
find out at once where Winifred was. “I don’t ask if you can, for I know
you must be able to do it. People don’t disappear in these days.”

But Mr. Babington, with a somewhat peevish question whether he knew how
many people did disappear, in the Thames or otherwise, and were never
heard of, in these famous days of ours, informed him that he knew
nothing about Winifred’s whereabouts. She had gone abroad, and with Miss
Farrell, that was all he knew. By this time Edward Langton had become
very anxious and unhappy, ready almost to advertise in the _Times_ or
take any other wild step. He resolved to lose no further time, not to
delay by writing, but to go off at once and find her as soon as he had
the smallest clue. This clue was found at last through the bankers (for
Langton was quite right in his certainty that people with a banking
account who draw money never do really disappear in these days), who did
not refuse to tell where the last remittances had been sent. He was so
anxious by this time that he went up to London himself to make these
inquiries, and came back again with the fullest determination to start
at once in search of Winifred. He sent to Mr. Marlitt, of Brentwood, who
was a young doctor, but recently established and much in want of
patients, to ask whether he could take charge of the few sick folk at
Bedloe, and made all his preparations to go. It was November by this
time, and all the fields were heaped with fallen leaves. He had settled
everything easily on the Saturday, and on Sunday night was going up to
town in time to catch the Continental mail next day.

Then--according to the usual perversity of human affairs--the epidemic
came all at once, which he had invoked some time before. It broke out on
the very Saturday when all his arrangements were made--two cases in one
house, one in the house next door. He perceived in a moment that this
was no time to leave his duty. Next day there were three more cases in
the village, and in the evening, just at the moment when he should have
been starting, the brougham from Bedloe drew up at his door, with an air
of agitation about the very horses, which had flecks of foam on their
shoulders, and every indication of having been hard driven. George
Chester entered precipitately, as pale as death.

“Oh, Langton,” he cried, “look here! don’t stand on ceremony. I never
did anything against you. You attend the children in the village; why
don’t you attend mine? Little Georgie’s got it!” the poor man cried out,
with quivering lips.

It is not for a moment to be supposed that Edward could resist such an
appeal. He went with the distracted father, and fought night and day for
two or three weeks for little Georgie’s life, as well as for the lives
of several other little Georgies as dear in their way. Here he had what
he wanted, but not when he wanted it. When he woke up in the morning
from the interrupted sleep, which was all his anxieties allowed him, he
would remember in anguish that even the clue given by the bankers would
serve no longer. But during the day, as he went from one bedside to
another, he had too much to remember, and so the dark winter days wore
away.

Winifred had taken refuge in the universal expedient of going “abroad.”
It is difficult to tell all that this means to simple minds. It means a
sort of cancelling of time and space, a flying on the wings of a dove,
an abstraction of one’s self and one’s affairs from the burden of
circumstances, from the questions of the importunate, from all that
holds us to a local habitation. Winifred was sick at heart of her
habitual place, and all the surroundings to which she had been
accustomed. It was not possible for her, she thought, to explain the
position, to answer all the demands, to make it apparent to the meanest
capacity how and why it was that her own heirship was at an end. She
fled from this, and from the unnatural (she said) prejudice against her
brother and his wife which seized her as soon as it became apparent that
Bedloe was in their hands--and she fled, but not so much from Edward, as
from what she thought his desertion of her. What she thought--for after
a while she too, like Edward himself, began to feel uncertain as to
whether he had deserted her--to ask herself whether she had been
blameless, to say to herself that it could not be, that it was
impossible they could part like this. What was it that had parted them?
It had been done in a moment, it had been her brother’s foolish
accusation--ah, no, not that, but her own tacit refusal of his counsel
and aid. When Winifred began to come to herself, to disentangle her
thoughts, to see everything in perspective, it became gradually and by
slow degrees apparent to her that if Edward was in the wrong, he was yet
not altogether or alone in the wrong. Her mind worked more slowly than
did Langton’s, partly because it had been far more strained and worn,
and because the complications were all on her side. She had to disengage
her mind from all that had troubled and disturbed her life for weeks
and months before, and to recover from the agitation of so many shocks
and changes before she could think calmly, or at least without the
burning at her heart of wounded feeling, hurt pride, and neglected love,
of all that concerned her lover. It was some time even before she spoke
to Miss Farrell of the subject that soon occupied all her thoughts. Miss
Farrell had felt Edward’s silence on her pupil’s account with almost
more bitterness than Winifred herself had felt it. She had put away his
name from her lips, and had concluded him unworthy. She avoided talking
of him even when Winifred began tentatively to approach the subject. “My
darling, don’t let us speak of him,” she had said. “I have not command
of myself: I might say things which I should be sorry for afterwards.”

“But why should he have changed so?” Winifred said; “what reason was
there? He was always kind and true.”

“I don’t know about true, Winnie.”

Then Winifred faltered a little, remembering how he had advised her to
humour her father. She made a little pause of reflection, and then
abandoned the subject for the moment; but only to return to it a hundred
and a hundred times. She was not one of those that prolong a
misunderstanding through a lifetime. She pondered and pondered, and it
was her instinct to think herself in the wrong. She had been hasty, she
had been self-absorbed. And had he not a right to be offended when she
so distinctly, of her own will, by no one’s suggestion, put him aside
from her counsels, and let him know that she must deal with her brothers
alone? It made her shiver to think what a thing it was she had thus
done. She would have done it again, it was a necessity of the position
in which she found herself. But yet when you reflect, to put your
betrothed husband away from you in a great crisis of fate, to reject his
aid, to bid him--for it was as good as bidding him--leave her to arrange
matters in her own way, what an outrage was that! She could not think
how she could have done it, and yet she would have done it over again.
To get Miss Farrell to see this was difficult, but she succeeded at
last; and then they both trembled and grew pale together to think of
what had been done. Poor Edward! and all those days when Winifred had
sat miserable in her room, feeling that her last hope and prop had
failed her, and that she was left alone in the world, what had he been
thinking on his side? That she had thrown him off, that she would have
none of him? In their consultations these ladies made great use of the
man’s wounded pride. They allowed to each other that it was the wrong
of all others which he would be least likely to bear. It was not only a
wrong, it was an insult. How could they ever have thought otherwise? It
was he who was forsaken, and that without a word, without a reason
given.

They had settled themselves, after some wanderings, in one of those
villages of the Riviera, which fashion and the pursuit of health have
taken out of the hands of their peasant inhabitants. It was not a great
place, full of life and commotion; but a little picturesque cluster of
houses, small and great, with an old campanile rising out of the midst
of them, and a soft background of mild olive-trees behind. They had
thought they would stay there till the winter was over, till England had
begun to grow green again, and the east winds were gone; but already,
though it was not yet Christmas, they were beginning to reconsider the
matter, to feel home calling them over the misty seas. Christmas! but
what a Christmas! with roses blooming, and all the landscape green and
soft, the sea warm enough to bathe in, the sunshine too hot at noon.
Winifred had begun to weary of the eternal greenness, of the skies which
were always clear, of the air which caressed and never smote her cheek,
before they had long been established in the little paradise which Miss
Farrell, even with all her desire to see her child happy, could not
pretend not to be pleased with.

“I cannot believe it is Christmas,” Winifred said discontentedly. “No
frost, no cold, even flowers!” as if this were a kind of insult.
“Everything,” she cried, “is out of season. I don’t see how we can spend
Christmas here.”

“It is not like Christmas weather,” said Miss Farrell; “but still, my
dear, neither was it in the Holy Land, I should suppose, not like what
we call Christmas,” she added, faltering a little; “but it is very nice,
Winnie, don’t you think, dear?”

“No, I don’t think it is nice: it is enervating, it is unmeaning, it has
no character in it. It might be May,” cried Winnie; and then she added
with a sudden outburst of passion, “I don’t think I can bear it any
longer. I cannot bear it any longer. Oh, Miss Farrell, Edward! what can
he be thinking of me, if he has not given up thinking of me altogether?”

“No, dear, not that,” Miss Farrell said, soothing her.

“What, then? he must be beginning to hate me. I cannot let Christmas
pass and this go on. Think of him alone amongst the frost and the snow,
nothing but his sick people, no one to cheer him, called out perhaps in
the middle of the night, riding miles and miles to comfort some poor
creature, and no one, no one to comfort him!”

“My dear child!” Miss Farrell cried, taking Winifred into her kind arms.

At this moment there was a tinkle at the queer little bell outside--or
rather it had tinkled at the moment when Winifred spoke of the frost and
snow. When Miss Farrell rose and hastened to her, to raise her downcast
head and dry her tears, the old lady gave a start and cry, displacing
suddenly that head which she had drawn to her own breast. Winifred, too,
looked up in the sudden shock; and there, opposite to her in the
doorway, a cold freshness as of the larger atmosphere outside coming in
with him, stood Edward Langton, pale and eager, asking, “May I come in?”
with a voice that was unsteady, between deadly anxiety and certain
happiness.

They said a great deal to each other, enough to fill volumes; but so far
as the present history is concerned, there need be no more to say.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Prodigals and their Inheritance;
vol. 2, by Mrs. Margaret Oliphant

